A Little History of Philosophy

The Man Who Asked Questions
Socrates and Plato

About 2,400 years ago in Athens a man was put to death for
asking too many questions. There were philosophers before
him, but it was with Socrates that the subject really took off. If
philosophy has a patron saint, it is Socrates.

Snub-nosed, podgy, shabby and a bit strange, Socrates did
not fit in. Although physically ugly and often unwashed, he had
great charisma and a brilliant mind. Everyone in Athens agreed
that there had never been anyone quite like him and probably
wouldn’t be again. He was unique. But he was also extremely
annoying. He saw himself as one of those horseflies that have a
nasty bite – a gadfly. They’re irritating, but don’t do serious
harm. Not everyone in Athens agreed, though. Some loved him;
others thought him a dangerous influence.

As a young man he had been a brave soldier fighting in
the Peloponnesian wars against the Spartans and their allies.
In middle age he shuffled around the marketplace, stopping
people from time to time and asking them awkward questions.
That was more or less all he did. But the questions he asked
were razor-sharp. They seemed straightforward; but they
weren’t.

An example of this was his conversation with Euthydemus.
Socrates asked him whether being deceitful counted as being
immoral. Of course it does, Euthydemus replied. He thought
that was obvious. But what, Socrates asked, if your friend is
feeling very low and might kill himself, and you steal his knife?
Isn’t that a deceitful act? Of course it is. But isn’t it moral rather
than immoral to do that? It’s a good thing, not a bad one –
despite being a deceitful act. Yes, says Euthydemus, who by now
is tied in knots. Socrates by using a clever counter-example has
shown that Euthydemus’ general comment that being deceitful
is immoral doesn’t apply in every situation. Euthydemus hadn’t
realized this before.

Over and over again Socrates demonstrated that the people
he met in the marketplace didn’t really know what they thought
they knew. A military commander would begin a conversation
totally confident that he knew what ‘courage’ meant, but after
twenty minutes in Socrates’ company would leave completely
confused. The experience must have been disconcerting.
Socrates loved to reveal the limits of what people genuinely
understood, and to question the assumptions on which they
built their lives. A conversation that ended in everyone realizing
how little they knew was for him a success. Far better that than
to carry on believing that you understood something when
you didn’t.

At that time in Athens the sons of rich men would be sent to
study with Sophists. The Sophists were clever teachers who
would coach their students in the art of speech-making. They
charged very high fees for this. Socrates in contrast didn’t
charge for his services. In fact he claimed he didn’t know
anything, so how could he teach at all? This didn’t stop students
coming to him and listening in on his conversations. It didn’t
make him popular with the Sophists either.

One day his friend Chaerophon went to the oracle of
Apollo at Delphi. The oracle was a wise old woman, a sibyl, who
would answer questions that visitors asked. Her answers were
usually in the form of a riddle. ‘Is anyone wiser than Socrates?’
Chaerophon asked. ‘No,’ came the answer. ‘No one is wiser than
Socrates.’

When Chaerophon told Socrates about this he didn’t believe
it at first. It really puzzled him. ‘How can I be the wisest man in
Athens when I know so little?’ he wondered. He devoted years
to questioning people to see if anyone was wiser than he was.
Finally he realized what the oracle had meant and that she had
been right. Lots of people were good at the various things they
did – carpenters were good at carpentry, and soldiers knew
about fighting. But none of them were truly wise. They didn’t
really know what they were talking about.

The word ‘philosopher’ comes from the Greek words meaning
‘love of wisdom’. The Western tradition in philosophy, the one
that this book follows, spread from Ancient Greece across large
parts of the world, at time cross-fertilized by ideas from the
East. The kind of wisdom that it values is based on argument,
reasoning and asking questions, not on believing things simply
because someone important has told you they are true. Wisdom
for Socrates was not knowing lots of facts, or knowing how to
do something. It meant understanding the true nature of our
existence, including the limits of what we can know. Philosophers
today are doing more or less what Socrates was doing: asking
tough questions, looking at reasons and evidence, struggling to
answer some of the most important questions we can ask
ourselves about the nature of reality and how we should live.
Unlike Socrates, though, modern philosophers have the benefit
of nearly two and a half thousand years of philosophical
thinking to build on. This book examines ideas of some of the
key thinkers writing in this tradition of Western thought, a
tradition that Socrates started.

What made Socrates so wise was that he kept asking ques-
tions and he was always willing to debate his ideas. Life, he
declared, is only worth living if you think about what you are
doing. An unexamined existence is all right for cattle, but not
for human beings.

Unusually for a philosopher, Socrates refused to write anything
down. For him talking was far better than writing. Written
words can’t answer back; they can’t explain anything to you
when you don’t understand them. Face-to-face conversation was
much better, he maintained. In conversation we can take into
account the kind of person we are talking to; we can adapt what
we say so that the message gets across. Because he refused to
write, it’s mainly through the work of Socrates’ star pupil Plato
that we have much idea of what this great man believed and
argued about. Plato wrote down a series of conversations between
Socrates and the people he questioned. These are known as the
Platonic Dialogues and are great works of literature as well as of
philosophy – in some ways Plato was the Shakespeare of his day.
Reading these dialogues, we get a sense of what Socrates was
like, how clever he was and how infuriating.

Actually it isn’t even as straightforward as that, as we can’t
always tell whether Plato was writing down what Socrates really
said, or whether he was putting ideas into the mouth of the
character he calls ‘Socrates’, ideas which are Plato’s own.

One of the ideas that most people believe is Plato’s rather
than Socrates’ is that the world is not at all as it seems. There is
a significant difference between appearance and reality. Most of
us mistake appearances for reality. We think we understand, but
we don’t. Plato believed that only philosophers understand what
the world is truly like. They discover the nature of reality by
thinking rather than relying on their senses.

To make this point, Plato described a cave. In that imaginary
cave there are people chained facing a wall. In front of them
they can see flickering shadows that they believe are real things.
They aren’t. What they see are shadows made by objects held up
in front of a fire behind them. These people spend their whole
lives thinking that the shadows projected on the wall are the real
world. Then one of them breaks free from his chains and turns
towards the fire. His eyes are blurry at first, but then he starts to
see where he is. He stumbles out of the cave and eventually is
able to look at the sun. When he comes back to the cave, no one
believes what he has to tell them about the world outside. The
man who breaks free is like a philosopher. He sees beyond
appearances. Ordinary people have little idea about reality
because they are content with looking at what’s in front of them
rather than thinking deeply about it. But the appearances are
deceptive. What they see are shadows, not reality.

This story of the cave is connected with what’s come to be
known as Plato’s Theory of Forms. The easiest way to under-
stand this is through an example. Think of all the circles that
you have seen in your life. Was any one of them a perfect circle?
No. Not one of them was absolutely perfect. In a perfect circle
every point on its circumference is exactly the same distance
from the centre point. Real circles never quite achieve this. But
you understood what I meant when I used the words ‘perfect
circle’. So what is that perfect circle? Plato would say that the
idea of a perfect circle is the Form of a circle. If you want to
understand what a circle is, you should focus on the Form of the
circle, not actual circles that you can draw and experience
through your visual sense, all of which are imperfect in some
way. Similarly, Plato thought, if you want to understand what
goodness is, then you need to concentrate on the Form of good-
ness, not on particular examples of it that you witness.
Philosophers are the people who are best suited to thinking
about the Forms in this abstract way; ordinary people get led
astray by the world as they grasp it through their senses.

Because philosophers are good at thinking about reality,
Plato believed they should be in charge and have all the political
power. In The Republic, his most famous work, he described an
imaginary perfect society. Philosophers would be at the top and
would get a special education; but they would sacrifice their
own pleasures for the sake of the citizens they ruled. Beneath
them would be soldiers who were trained to defend the country,
and beneath them would be the workers. These three groups of
people would be in a perfect balance, Plato thought, a balance
that was like a well-balanced mind with the reasonable part
keeping the emotions and desires in control. Unfortunately his
model of society was profoundly anti-democratic, and would
keep the people under control by a combination of lies and
force. He would have banned most art, on the grounds that he
thought it gave false representations of reality. Painters paint
appearances, but appearances are deceptive about the Forms.
Every aspect of life in Plato’s ideal republic would be strictly
controlled from above. It’s what we would now call a totalitarian
state. Plato thought that letting the people vote was like letting
the passengers steer a ship – far better to let people who knew
what they were doing take charge.

Fifth-century Athens was quite different from the society that
Plato imagined in The Republic. It was a democracy of sorts,
though only about 10 per cent of the population could vote.
Women and slaves, for example, were automatically excluded.
But citizens were equal before the law, and there was an elabo-
rate lottery system to make sure that everyone had a fair chance
of influencing political decisions.

Athens as a whole didn’t value Socrates as highly as Plato
valued him. Far from it. Many Athenians felt that Socrates was
dangerous and was deliberately undermining the government. In
399 bc, when Socrates was 70 years old, one of them, Meletus,
took him to court. He claimed that Socrates was neglecting the
Athenian gods, introducing new gods of his own. He also
suggested that Socrates was teaching the young men of Athens to
behave badly, encouraging them to turn against the authorities.
These were both very serious accusations. It is difficult to know
now how accurate they were. Perhaps Socrates really did
discourage his students from following the state religion, and
there is some evidence that he enjoyed mocking Athenian democ-
racy. That would have been consistent with his character. What is
certainly true is that many Athenians believed the charges.

They voted on whether or not he was guilty. Just over half
of the 501 citizens who made up the huge jury thought he
was, and sentenced him to death. If he’d wanted to, he could
probably have talked his way out of being executed. But
instead, true to his reputation as a gadfly, he annoyed the
Athenians even more by arguing that he had done nothing
wrong and that they should, in fact, be rewarding him by giving
him free meals for life instead of punishing him. That didn’t
go down well.

He was put to death by being forced to drink poison made
from hemlock, a plant that gradually paralyses the body. Socrates
said goodbye to his wife and three sons, and then gathered his
students around him. If he had the choice to carry on living
quietly, not asking any more difficult questions, he would not
take it. He’d rather die than that. He had an inner voice that told
him to keep questioning everything, and he could not betray it.
Then he drank the cup of poison. Very soon he was dead.

In Plato’s dialogues, though, Socrates lives on. This difficult
man, who kept asking questions and would rather die than stop
thinking about how things really are, has been an inspiration for
philosophers ever since.

Socrates’ immediate impact was on those around him. Plato
carried on teaching in the spirit of Socrates after his teacher's
death. By far his most impressive pupil was Aristotle, a very
different sort of thinker from either of them.
