Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) was one of England’s greatest
political thinkers. What’s less well known is that he was also an
early fitness fanatic. He would go out for a long walk every
morning, striding quickly up hills so as to get out of breath. In
case he had any good ideas while out he had a special stick
made with an inkwell in the handle. This tall, red-faced,
cheerful man with a moustache and a little wispy beard had
been a sickly child. But as an adult he was extremely healthy and
played real tennis into old age. He ate lots of fish, drank very
little wine, and used to sing – behind closed doors, and out of
earshot – to exercise his lungs. And, of course, like most philos-
ophers, he had a highly active mind. The result was that he lived
to 91, an exceptional age for the seventeenth century when
average life expectancy was 35.

Despite his genial character, Hobbes, like Machiavelli, had a
low view of human beings. We are all basically selfish, driven by
fear of death and the hope of personal gain, he believed. All of
us seek power over others, whether we realize this or not. If you
don’t accept Hobbes’ picture of humanity, why do you lock the
door when you leave your house? Surely it’s because you know
that there are many people out there who would happily steal
everything you own? But, you might argue, only some people
are that selfish. Hobbes disagreed. He thought that at heart we
all are, and that it is only the rule of law and the threat of
punishment that keep us in check.

The consequence of this, he argued, was that if society broke
down and you had to live in what he called ‘a state of nature’,
without laws or anyone with the power to back them up, you,
like everyone else, would steal and murder when necessary. At
least, you’d have to do that if you wanted to carry on living. In a
world of scarce resources, particularly if you were struggling to
find food and water to survive, it could actually be rational to
kill other people before they killed you. In Hobbes’ memorable
description, life outside society would be ‘solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish, and short’.

Take away the power of the state to prevent people from
helping themselves to each other’s land and killing whoever
they want to, and the result is a never-ending war in which
everyone is against everyone else. It is hard to imagine a worse
situation. In this lawless world even the strongest wouldn’t be
safe for long. We all have to sleep; and when we are asleep we
are vulnerable to attack. Even the weakest, if cunning enough,
would be able to destroy the strongest.

You might imagine that the way to avoid being killed would be
to team up with friends. The trouble is you couldn’t be sure that
anyone was trustworthy. If other people promised to help you,
then it might sometimes be in their interest to break their prom-
ises. Any activity that required co-operation, like growing food
on a large scale, or building, would be impossible without a basic
level of trust. You wouldn’t know that you’d been tricked until it
was too late, and perhaps by that time you’d literally have been
stabbed in the back. There would be no one to punish your back-
stabber. Your enemies could be everywhere. You’d live your whole
life on your own in fear of attack: not an attractive prospect.

The solution, Hobbes argued, was to put some powerful indi-
vidual or parliament in charge. The individuals in the state of
nature would have to enter into a ‘social contract’, an agreement
to give up some of their dangerous freedoms for the sake of
safety. Without what he called a ‘sovereign’, life would be a kind
of hell. This sovereign would be given the right to inflict severe
punishment on anyone who stepped out of line. He believed
that there were certain natural laws that we would recognize as
important, such as that we should treat others as we’d expect to
be treated ourselves. Laws are no good if there isn’t someone or
something strong enough to make everyone follow them.
Without laws, and without a powerful sovereign, people in the
state of nature could expect a violent death. The only consola-
tion was that such a life would be very brief.

Leviathan (1651), Hobbes’ most important book, explains in
detail the steps needed to move from the nightmarish situation
of the state of nature to a secure society in which life is bearable.
‘Leviathan’ was a gigantic sea monster described in the Bible.
For Hobbes it was a reference to the great power of the state.
Leviathan opens with a picture of a giant towering over a hill-
side, holding a sword and a sceptre. This figure is made up of
lots of smaller people, who are recognizably still individuals.
The giant represents the powerful state with a sovereign as its
head. Without a sovereign, Hobbes believed, everything would
fall apart and society would decompose into separate people
ready to tear each other to pieces in order to survive.

Individuals in the state of nature, then, had very good reasons
for wanting to work together and seek peace. It was the only way
they could be protected. Without that their lives would be
terrible. Safety was far more important than freedom. Fear of
death would drive people towards forming a society. He thought
that they would agree to give up quite a lot of freedom in order
to make a social contract with each other, a promise to let a
sovereign impose laws on them. They’d be better off with a
powerful authority in charge than all fighting each other.

Hobbes had lived through dangerous times, even in the
womb. He was born early because his mother had gone into
labour when she heard that the Spanish Armada was sailing to
England and would probably invade the country. Fortunately it
didn’t. Later he escaped the dangers of the English Civil War by
moving to Paris, but the real fear that England could easily
descend into anarchy haunted his later writing. It was in Paris
that he wrote Leviathan, returning to England soon after it was
published in 1651.

Like many thinkers of his day, Hobbes wasn’t just a philoso-
pher – he was what we would now call a Renaissance man. He
had serious interests in geometry and science, and in ancient
history too. As a young man he loved literature and had written
and translated it. In philosophy, which he only took up in
middle age, he was a materialist, believing that humans were
simply physical beings. There is no such thing as the soul: we
are simply bodies, which are ultimately complex machines.

Clockwork mechanisms were the most advanced technology
in the seventeenth century. Hobbes believed that muscles and
organs in the body were the equivalent of these: he frequently
wrote about the ‘springs’ of action and the ‘wheels’ that move us.
He was convinced that all aspects of human existence, including
thinking, were physical activities. There was no space for the
soul in his philosophy. This is a modern idea that many scien-
tists hold now, but it was radical for his time. He even claimed
that God must be a large physical object, though some people
took this to be a disguised way of declaring that he was an
atheist.

Critics of Hobbes think he went too far in allowing the sover-
eign, whether it was a king or queen or parliament, to have such
power over the individual in society. The state he describes is
what we would now call an authoritarian one: one in which the
sovereign has almost unlimited power over citizens. Peace may
be desirable, and fear of violent death a strong incentive to
submit to peace-keeping powers. But to put so much in the
hands of an individual or group of individuals can be dangerous.
He didn’t believe in democracy; he didn’t believe in the ability
of the people to make decisions for themselves. But if he’d
known about the horrors committed by tyrants in the twentieth
century, he might have changed his mind.

Hobbes was notorious for refusing to believe in the existence
of the soul. René Descartes, his contemporary, in contrast,
believed that mind and body were completely distinct from
each other. This was probably why Hobbes thought Descartes
was much better at geometry than philosophy and should have
stuck to that.