The Prince and the Cobbler
John Locke and Thomas Reid

What were you like as a baby? If you have one, look at a photo-
graph taken at the time. What do you see? Was that really you?
You probably look quite different now. Can you remember what
it was like being a baby? Most of us can’t. We all change over
time. We grow, develop, mature, decline, forget things. Most of
us get wrinklier, eventually our hair turns white or falls out, we
change our views, our friends, our dress sense, our priorities. In
what sense, then, will you be the same person as that baby when
you are old? This question of what makes someone the same
person over time is one that vexed the English philosopher John
Locke (1632–1704).

Locke, like many philosophers, had wide interests. He was
enthusiastic about the scientific discoveries of his friends Robert
Boyle and Isaac Newton, was involved in the politics of his day
and also wrote about education. In the aftermath of the English
Civil War, he fled to the Netherlands when accused of plotting
to murder the newly restored king, Charles II. From there he
championed religious toleration, arguing that it was absurd to
try to force people to change their religious beliefs through
torture. His view that we have a God-given right to life, freedom,
happiness and property influenced the founding fathers who
wrote the United States Constitution.

We don’t have any photographs or drawings of Locke as a
baby. But he probably changed quite a lot as he grew older. In
midlife he was a gaunt, intense-looking figure with long straggly
hair. As a baby, though, he would have been quite different. One
of Locke’s beliefs was that the mind of a newborn is like a blank
slate. We don’t know anything when we are born, and all our
knowledge comes from our experience in life. As the baby
Locke grew into the young philosopher, he acquired all kinds of
beliefs and became the person we think of now as John Locke.
But in what sense was he the same person as the baby, and in
what sense was the middle-aged Locke the same person as the
young man?

This sort of problem doesn’t just arise for human beings
wondering about their relationship to their past. As Locke
noticed, it can even be an issue when thinking about socks. If
you have a sock with a hole in it and you patch that hole up, and
then patch up another hole, eventually you might end up with a
sock that consists just of the patches, with none of the original
material there at all. Would that still be the same sock? In one
sense it is, because there is a continuity of parts from the orig-
inal to the completely patched up sock. But in another sense it
isn’t the same sock, because none of the original material is
there. Or think of an oak tree. An oak tree grows from an acorn,
loses its leaves each year, gets bigger, branches fall off, but still
remains the same oak tree. Is the acorn the same plant as the
sapling, and the sapling the same plant as the huge oak?

One way of approaching the question about what makes a
human being the same person over time would be to point
out that we are living things. You are the same individual animal
that you were as a baby. Locke used the word ‘man’ (meaning by
that ‘man or woman’) to refer to the ‘human animal’. He thought
it was true to say that over a life each of us remains the same
‘man’ in that sense. There is a continuity of the living human
being that develops in the course of its life. But for Locke
being the same ‘man’ was very different from being the same
person.

According to Locke, I could be the same ‘man’, but not the
same person I was previously. How could that be? What makes
us the same person over time, Locke claimed, is our conscious-
ness, our awareness of our own selves. What you can’t remember
isn’t part of you as a person. To illustrate this he imagined a
prince waking up with a cobbler’s memories; and a cobbler with
a prince’s memories. The prince wakes up as usual in his palace,
and to outside appearances is the same person he was when he
went to sleep. But because he has the cobbler’s memories instead
of his own, he feels that he is the cobbler. Locke’s point was that
the prince is right to feel that he is the cobbler. Bodily continuity
doesn’t decide the issue. What matters in questions about
personal identity is psychological continuity. If you have the
prince’s memories, then you are the prince. If you have
the cobbler’s memories, you are the cobbler, even if you have the
body of a prince. If the cobbler had committed a crime, it would
be the one with the prince’s body that we should hold respon-
sible for it.

Of course in ordinary cases memories don’t switch like that.
Locke was using this thought experiment to make a point. But
some people do claim that it is possible that more than one
person can inhabit a single body. That is a condition known as
multiple personality disorder, where it appears that different
personalities are present within a single individual. Locke antic-
ipated this possibility and imagined two completely inde-
pendent persons living in one body – one present by day, the
other only at night. If these two minds have no access to each
other, then they are two persons, on Locke’s account.

For Locke, questions of personal identity were closely
connected with moral responsibility. He believed that God would
only punish people for crimes they remembered committing.
Someone who no longer remembered doing evil wouldn’t be the
same person who committed the crime. In everyday life, of
course, people lie about what they remember. So if someone
claims to have forgotten what they’ve done, judges are reluctant
to let them off. But because God knows everything, he will be
able to tell who deserves punishment and who doesn’t. A conse-
quence of Locke’s view would be that if Nazi-hunters track down
an old man who in his youth had been a concentration camp
guard, the old man should only be held responsible for what he
can remember, and not for any other crimes. God wouldn’t
punish him for the actions he’d forgotten about, even if ordinary
courts wouldn’t give him the benefit of the doubt.

Locke’s approach to personal identity also gave an answer to
a question that vexed some of his contemporaries. They worried
about whether you needed the same body to be brought back to
life in order to go to heaven. If you did, what would happen if
your body had been eaten by a cannibal or a wild animal? How
would you get all the body parts back together to be raised from
the dead? If the cannibal had eaten you, then bits of you would
have become part of him or her. So how could both the cannibal
and the cannibal’s meal (i.e. you) both be restored as bodies?
Locke made clear that what mattered was that you were the
same person in the afterlife rather than the same body. On his
view you could be the same person if you had the same memo-
ries, even if these were attached to a different body.

One consequence of Locke’s view is that you probably aren’t
the same person as the baby in the photograph. You are the
same individual, but unless you can remember being a baby,
you can’t be the same person. Your personal identity only
extends as far back as your memory. As your memories fade in
old age, too, the extent of what you are as a person will also
shrink.

Some philosophers feel that Locke went a bit far with his
emphasis on self-conscious memory as the basis of personal
identity. In the eighteenth century, the Scottish philosopher
Thomas Reid came up with an example showing a weakness in
Locke’s way of thinking about what it is to be a person. An old
soldier can remember his bravery in a battle when he was a
young officer; and when he was a young officer he could
remember that he had been hit when as a boy he’d stolen apples
from an orchard. But in his old age, the soldier can no longer
remember this event from his childhood. Surely this pattern of
overlapping memories would mean that the old soldier was still
the same person as the boy? Thomas Reid thought it was
obvious that the old soldier was still the same person as the
young boy.

But according to Locke’s theory the old soldier was the same
person as the young brave officer, but wasn’t the same person as
the young child who was hit (because the old soldier had
forgotten about that). Yet, also according to Locke’s theory, the
young brave officer was the same person as the child (because
he could remember his orchard escapade). This gives the absurd
result that the old soldier is the same person as the young brave
officer, and the young brave officer is the same person as the
child; but at the same time the old soldier and the child are not
the same person. As a matter of logic that doesn’t work at all. It
is like saying A = B and B = C, but A doesn’t equal C. Personal
identity, it seems, relies on overlapping memories, not on total
recall as Locke had thought.

Locke’s impact as a philosopher rests on far more than his
discussion of personal identity. In his great work An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding (1690), he put forward the
view that our ideas represent the world to us, but that only some
aspects of that world are as they seem. This stimulated George
Berkeley to come up with his own imaginative account of
reality.