Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

The Best of All Possible Worlds?
Voltaire and Gottfried Leibniz

If you were designing the world would you have done it this
way? Probably not. But in the eighteenth century some people
argued that theirs was the best of all possible worlds. ‘Whatever
is, is right,’ declared the English poet Alexander Pope (1688–
1744). Everything in the world is the way it is for a reason:
it’s all God’s work and God is good and all-powerful. So even if
things seem to be going badly, they’re not. Disease, floods,
earthquakes, forest fires, drought – they’re all just part of God’s
plan. Our mistake is to focus close up on individual details
rather than the larger picture. If we could stand back and see the
universe from where God sits we would recognize the perfec-
tion of it, how each piece fits together and everything that seems
evil is really part of a much larger plan.

Pope was not alone in his optimism. The German philoso-
pher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) used his Principle
of Sufficient Reason to come to the same conclusion.

He assumed that there must be a logical explanation for every-
thing. Since God is perfect in every respect – that is part of
the standard definition of God – it followed from this that God
must have had excellent reasons for making the universe
in precisely the form that he did. Nothing could have been
left to chance. God did not create an absolutely perfect world
in every respect – that would have made the world into God,
since God is the most perfect thing that there is or can be. But
he must have made the best of all possible worlds, the one with
the least amount of evil needed to achieve that result. There
couldn’t have been a better way of putting the bits together
than this: no design would have produced more goodness using
less evil.

François-Marie Arouet (1694–1778), better known as Voltaire,
didn’t see it this way. He took no comfort at all from this ‘proof ’
that everything is going well. He was deeply suspicious of philo-
sophical systems and the kind of thinkers who believe they
have all the answers. This French playwright, satirist, fiction
writer and thinker was well known throughout Europe for his
outspoken views. The most famous sculpture of him, by Jean-
Antoine Houdon, captures the tight-lipped smile and laughter
lines of this witty, brave man. A champion of free speech and
religious toleration, he was a controversial figure. He is, for
instance, supposed to have declared, ‘I hate what you say,
but will defend to the death your right to say it’, a powerful
defence of the idea that even views that you despise deserve
to be heard. In eighteenth-century Europe, however, the Catholic
Church strictly controlled what could be published. Many of
Voltaire’s plays and books were censored and burned in public
and he was even imprisoned in the Bastille in Paris because
he had insulted a powerful aristocrat. But none of this stopped
him challenging the prejudices and pretensions of those around
him. He is best known today, though, as the author of Candide
(1759).

In this short philosophical novel he completely undermined
the kind of optimism about humanity and the universe that
Pope and Leibniz had expressed, and he did it in such an enter-
taining way that the book became an instant bestseller. Wisely
Voltaire left his name off the title page, otherwise its publication
would have landed him in prison again for making fun of
religious beliefs.

Candide is the central character. His name suggests inno-
cence and purity. At the start of the book, he is a young servant
who falls hopelessly in love with his master’s daughter,
Cunégonde, but is chased out of her father’s castle when he is
caught in a compromising position with her. From then on, in
a fast-moving and often fantastical tale, he travels through real
and imaginary countries with his philosophy tutor Dr Pangloss,
until he finally meets up with his lost love Cunégonde again,
though by now she is old and ugly. In a series of comical
episodes Candide and Pangloss witness terrible events and
encounter a range of characters along the way, all of whom have
themselves suffered terrible misfortunes.

Voltaire uses the philosophy tutor, Pangloss, to spout a cari-
catured version of Leibniz’s philosophy, which the writer then
pokes fun at. Whatever happens, whether it is a natural disaster,
torture, war, rape, religious persecution or slavery, Pangloss
treats it as further confirmation that they live in the best of all
possible worlds. Rather than causing him to rethink his beliefs,
each disaster just increases his confidence that everything is for
the best and this is how things had to be to produce the most
perfect situation. Voltaire takes great delight in revealing
Pangloss’ refusal to see what is in front of him, and this is meant
to mock Leibniz’s optimism. But to be fair to Leibniz, his point
wasn’t that evil doesn’t occur, but rather that the evil that does
exist was needed to bring about the best possible world. It does,
however, suggest that there is so much evil in the world that
it is hardly likely that Leibniz was right – this can’t be the
minimum needed to achieve a good result. There is just too
much pain and suffering in the world for that to be true.

In 1755 one of the worst natural disasters of the eighteenth
century occurred: the Lisbon earthquake that killed more than
20,000 people. This Portuguese city was devastated not just by
the earthquake, but also by the tsunami that followed, and then
by fires that raged for days. The suffering and loss of life shook
Voltaire’s belief in God. He couldn’t understand how an event
like this could be part of a larger plan. The scale of suffering
didn’t make any sense to him. Why would a good God allow this
to happen? Nor could he see why Lisbon was the target. Why
there and not somewhere else?

In a key episode in Candide, Voltaire used this real tragedy to
help make his case against the optimists. The travellers are ship-
wrecked near Lisbon in a storm that kills almost everyone else
on board their ship. The only one of the crew to survive was a
sailor who had apparently deliberately drowned one of their
friends. But despite the obvious lack of justice in this, Pangloss
still sees everything that happens through the filter of his philo-
sophical optimism. Arriving in Lisbon just after the earthquake
has devastated the city and left tens of thousands dead or dying
around him, Pangloss continues, absurdly, to maintain that
all is well. In the rest of the book things get even worse for
Pangloss – he is hanged, dissected alive, beaten and made to row
a galley. But he still clings to his faith that Leibniz was right to
believe in a pre-established harmony of everything that is.
There is no experience that will budge the stubborn philosophy
teacher from his beliefs.

Unlike Pangloss, Candide is gradually changed by what he
witnesses. Although at the start of their journey he shares his
teacher’s views, by the end of the book his experiences have
made him sceptical about all philosophy and he opts for a more
practical solution to life’s problems.

Candide and Cunégonde have been reunited, and they are
living together with Pangloss and several of the other characters
on a small farm. One character, Martin, suggests that the only
way to make life bearable is to stop philosophizing and get
down to work. For the first time they start to co-operate and
each gets on with what he or she is best at. When Pangloss starts
to argue that everything bad that has happened in their lives
was a necessary evil that led to this happy conclusion, Candide
tells him that’s all very well, but ‘we must cultivate our garden’.
These are the final words of the story, and are intended to
convey a strong message to the reader. The phrase is the moral
of the book, the punchline of this extended joke. At one level,
within the story, Candide is simply saying that they need to get
on with the work of farming, they need to keep themselves
occupied. At a deeper level, though, cultivating our garden, for

Voltaire, is a metaphor for doing something useful for humanity
rather than just talking about abstract philosophical questions.
That’s what the characters in the book need to do to flourish
and be happy. But, Voltaire hints strongly, this isn’t just what
Candide and his friends should do. It’s what we all ought to do.
Voltaire was unusual amongst philosophers in being rich. As
a young man he had been part of a syndicate that had found a
flaw in the state lottery and had bought thousands of winning
tickets. He invested wisely and became even richer. This gave
him the financial freedom to champion the causes he believed
in. Rooting out injustice was his passion. One of his most
impressive acts was to defend the reputation of Jean Calas, who
had been tortured and executed for supposedly murdering his
own son. Calas was clearly innocent: his son had committed
suicide, but the court had ignored the evidence. Voltaire
managed to get the judgment overturned. There was no chance
of consolation for poor Jean Calas, who had protested his inno-
cence to his last breath; but at least his ‘accomplices’ were freed.
This is what ‘cultivating our garden’ meant in practice for
Voltaire.

From the way Voltaire mocks Pangloss’ ‘proof’ that God has
produced the best of all possible worlds, you might assume that
Candide’s author was an atheist. In fact, although he had no
time for organized religion, he was a deist, someone who
believes that there is visible evidence of God’s existence and
design to be found in nature. For him, looking up at the night
sky was all it took to prove that a Creator exists. David Hume
was highly sceptical of this idea. His criticisms of this style of
reasoning are devastating.