Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

The Imaginary Watchmaker
David Hume

Take a look in the mirror at one of your eyes. It has a lens that
focuses the image, an iris that adapts to changing light, and
eyelids and eyelashes to protect it. If you look to one side, the
eyeball swivels in its socket. It’s also quite beautiful. How did
that happen? It’s an amazing bit of engineering. How could an
eye have turned out this way just by chance?

Imagine stumbling through a jungle on a deserted island, and
coming to a clearing. You clamber over the tumbled remains of
a palace with walls, stairs, pathways and courtyards. You know
it couldn’t have got there by chance. Someone must have
designed it, some kind of architect. If you find a watch when
you are out for a walk it is quite reasonable to assume that it has
been made by a watchmaker, and that it was designed for a
purpose: to tell the time. Those tiny cogwheels didn’t just fall
into place by themselves. Someone must have thought it all
through. All these examples seem to point to the same thing:
objects that look as if they have been designed almost certainly
have been.

Well then, think of nature: trees, flowers, mammals, birds,
reptiles, insects, even amoebae. These things also look as if they
have been designed. Living organisms are much more compli-
cated than any watch. Mammals have complex nerve systems,
blood pumping round their body, and are usually very well
suited to the places they inhabit. So surely an incredibly powerful
and intelligent Creator must have made them. That Creator – a
Divine Watchmaker or Divine Architect – must have been God.
Or that’s what many people thought in the eighteenth century
when David Hume was writing – and some still do today.

This argument for the existence of God is often known as the
Design Argument. New discoveries in science in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries seemed to support it. Microscopes
revealed the complexity of tiny pond animals; telescopes showed
the beauty and regularity of the solar system and the Milky
Way. These too seemed to have been put together with great
precision.

The Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711–76) wasn’t
convinced. Influenced by Locke, he set out to explain the nature
of humanity and our place in the universe by considering how
we acquire knowledge and the limits of what we can learn by
using reason. Like Locke, he believed that our knowledge comes
from observation and experience, so he was particularly inter-
ested in an argument for God’s existence that began with obser-
vation of some aspects of the world.

He believed the Design Argument was based on bad logic.
His Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748) included
a chapter attacking the idea that we can prove God’s existence in
this way. That chapter and one arguing that it was never reason-
able to believe eyewitness reports of miracles were extremely
controversial. At the time in Britain it was difficult to be openly
against religious beliefs. This meant Hume never got a job at a
university despite being one of the great thinkers of his time.
His friends gave him good advice when they told him not to
allow publication of his most powerful attack on the usual argu-
ments for God’s existence, his Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion (1779), until after his death.

Does the Design Argument prove the existence of God?
Hume thought it didn’t. The argument does not provide enough
evidence to conclude that an all-powerful, all-knowing and
all-good being must exist. Most of Hume’s philosophy concen-
trated on the kind of evidence we can give in support of
our beliefs. The Design Argument is based on the fact that the
world appears to be designed. But, Hume argued, just because it
looks designed, it doesn’t follow that it really was designed; nor
does it follow that God was the designer. How did he arrive at
that conclusion?

Imagine an old-fashioned set of weighing scales partly behind
a screen. You can only see one of the two pans of the scales. If
you see that pan going up, all you can know is that whatever is
in the other pan is heavier than the one you can see. You can’t
tell what colour it is, whether it is cube-shaped or spherical,
whether it has words written on it, or is covered in fur, or
anything else.

In this example we’re thinking about causes and effects. In
answer to the question ‘What caused the pan to move upwards?’
all you can answer is, ‘The cause was something heavier in the
other pan.’ You see the effect – the pan going up – and try to
work out the cause from that. But without further evidence
there’s not a lot more you can say. Anything you do say is pure
guesswork and we have no way of telling whether it is true or
not if we can’t look behind the screen. Hume thought we are in
a similar situation with the world around us. We see the effects
of various causes, and try to work out the most likely explana-
tion of these effects. We see a human eye, a tree, a mountain,
and they might well appear to be designed. But what can we
say about their probable designer? The eye looks as if an
eye-maker has thought about how best to make it work. It
doesn’t follow from this, though, that the eye-maker was God.
Why not?

God is usually thought of as having the three special powers
already mentioned: he is all-powerful, all-knowing and all-
good. Even if you reach the conclusion that something very
powerful made the human eye, you don’t have evidence to say
that it was all-powerful. The eye has some flaws. Things go
wrong: many people need spectacles to see properly, for example.
Would an all-powerful, all-knowing and all-good God have
designed the eye just this way? Possibly. But the evidence we get
from looking at the eye doesn’t show this. At best it shows that
something highly intelligent and very powerful and skilful
made it.

But does it even show that? There are other possible explana-
tions. How do we know the eye wasn’t designed by a team of
lesser gods all working together? Most complex machinery is
put together by a team of people; why doesn’t the same hold for
eyes and other natural objects, assuming they are put together
at all? Most buildings are built by a team of builders; why should
an eye be different? Or perhaps the eye was made by a very old
god who has since died. Or a very young god who was still
learning how to design perfect eyes. Because we don’t have
evidence to decide between these different stories, we can’t be
sure just from looking at the eye – an apparently designed
object – that it was definitely made by a single living God with
the traditional powers. If you start thinking clearly in this area,
Hume believed, you will be very limited in the conclusions you
can draw.

Another argument that Hume attacked was the Argument
from Miracles. Most religions claim that miracles have
happened. People are raised from the dead, walk on water, or
make unexpected recoveries from illness; statues talk or cry, the
list goes on. But should we believe that miracles have happened
just because other people tell us they have? Hume thought not.
He was deeply sceptical about that idea. If someone tells you
that a man has miraculously recovered from an illness, what
does that mean? For something to be a miracle, Hume thought,
it had to defy a law of nature. A law of nature was something
like ‘No one dies and comes back to life again’ or ‘Statues never
talk’ or ‘No one can walk on water’. There is a huge amount
of evidence that these laws of nature hold. But if someone
witnesses a miracle, why shouldn’t we believe them? Think
about what you would say if your friend came running into the
room now and told you that she had seen someone walking
on water.

Hume’s view was that there were always more plausible expla-
nations of what was going on. If your friend tells you that she
saw someone walking on water, it is always more likely that she
is either deceiving you, or has been mistaken herself, than that
she has witnessed a genuine miracle. We know that some people
delight in being the centre of attention and are prepared to lie to
get there. So that’s one possible explanation. But we also know
that all of us can get things wrong. We make mistakes all the
time about what we see and hear. Often we want to believe
that we have seen something unusual and so avoid the more
obvious explanation. Even today there are many people who
jump to the conclusion that every unexplained sound late at
night is the result of supernatural activity – ghosts moving
about – rather than being due to more ordinary causes such as
mice or the wind.

Although he regularly criticized the arguments used by reli-
gious believers, Hume never openly declared that he was an
atheist. He may not have been. His published views could be
read as claiming that there is a divine intelligence behind every-
thing in the universe, it’s just that we can never say much about
the qualities of that divine intelligence. Our powers of reason,
when used logically, don’t tell us much at all about what quali-
ties this ‘God’ must have. On the basis of this, some philoso-
phers think he was an agnostic. But he probably was an atheist
by the end of his life, even if he stopped short of that before
then. When his friends came to visit him in Edinburgh in the
summer of 1776 as he was dying he made clear that he wasn’t
about to have a deathbed conversion. Far from it. James Boswell,
a Christian, asked him whether he was worried about what
would happen after he died. Hume told him he had absolutely
no hope that he would survive death. He gave the answer that
Epicurus might have given (see Chapter 4): he was, he said, no
more worried about the time after his death than he was about
the time he had not existed before his birth.

Hume had many brilliant contemporaries, many of whom he
knew personally. One of them, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, made a
significant impact on political philosophy.