Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

Born Free
Jean-Jacques Rousseau

In 1766 a small dark-eyed man in a long fur coat went to see a
play at the Drury Lane theatre in London. Most of the people
there, including the king, George III, were more interested in
this foreign visitor than in the play being performed on stage.
He seemed uncomfortable and was worried about his Alsatian
dog, which he’d had to leave locked in his room. This man didn’t
enjoy the sort of attention he got in the theatre and would have
been far happier out in the country somewhere on his own
looking for wild flowers. But who was he? And why did
everyone find him so fascinating? The answer is that this was
the great Swiss thinker and writer, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
(1712–78). A literary and philosophical sensation, Rousseau’s
arrival in London, at David Hume’s invitation, caused the sort
of commotion and crowds that a famous pop star would today.

By this time the Catholic Church had banned several of his
books because they contained unconventional religious ideas.
Rousseau believed that true religion came from the heart and
didn’t need religious ceremonies. But it was his political ideas
that caused the most trouble.

‘Man was born free, and everywhere he is in chains,’ he
declared at the beginning of his book, The Social Contract. It’s
no surprise that revolutionaries learnt these words by heart.
Maximilien Robespierre, like many of the leaders of the French
Revolution, found them inspirational. The revolutionaries
wanted to break the chains that the rich had placed on so many
of the poor. Some of them were starving while their rich masters
enjoyed a high life. Like Rousseau, the revolutionaries were
angry about how the wealthy behaved while the poor could
barely find enough to eat. They wanted true freedom together
with equality and brotherhood. It’s unlikely, though, that
Rousseau, who had died a decade before, would have approved
of Robespierre sending his enemies to the guillotine in a ‘reign
of terror’. Cutting off your opponents’ heads was closer in spirit
to Machiavelli’s thinking than to his.

According to Rousseau, human beings are naturally good. Left
to our own devices, living in a forest, we wouldn’t cause many
problems. But take us out of this state of nature and put us in
cities and things start to go wrong. We become obsessed with
trying to dominate other people, and with getting other people’s
attention. This competitive approach to life has terrible psycho-
logical effects and the invention of money just makes it all far
worse. Envy and greed were the result of living together in cities.
In the wild, individual ‘noble savages’ would be healthy, strong
and, above all, free, but civilization seemed to be corrupting
human beings, Rousseau felt. Nevertheless, he was optimistic
about finding a better way of organizing society, one that would
allow individuals to flourish and be fulfilled, yet which would be
harmonious with everyone working towards a common good.

The problem he set himself in The Social Contract (1762) was
to find a way for people to live together that would allow
everyone to be as free as they were outside society while still
obeying the laws of the state. This sounds impossible to achieve.
And perhaps it is. If the cost of becoming part of society was a
kind of enslavement, that would be too high a price to pay.
Freedom and strict rules imposed by society don’t go together,
since the rules can be like chains preventing some sorts of
action. But Rousseau believed that there was a way out. His
solution was based on his idea of the General Will.

The General Will is whatever is best for the whole community,
the whole state. When people choose to group together for
protection, it seems that they have to give up many of their
freedoms. That’s what Hobbes and Locke both thought. It’s hard
to see how you can remain genuinely free and yet live in a large
group of people – there have to be laws to keep everyone in check
and some restrictions on behaviour. But Rousseau believed that
as an individual living within a state you can both be free
and obey the laws of the state, and that rather than being in
opposition, these ideas of freedom and obedience can combine.

It’s easy to misunderstand what Rousseau meant by the
General Will. Here’s a modern example. If you asked most
people, they’d prefer not to have to pay high taxes. In fact that is
a common way for governments to get elected: they simply
promise to lower the rate of taxation. Given the choice between
paying 20 per cent of their earnings as tax and 5 per cent of their
earnings as tax, most people would prefer to pay the lower
amount. But that is not the General Will. What everyone says
they want if you ask them is what Rousseau would call the Will
of All. In contrast, the General Will is what they ought to want,
what would be good for the whole community, not just for each
person within it thinking selfishly. When working out what the
General Will is we have to ignore self-interest and focus on the
good of the whole society, the common good. If we accept that
many services, such as the upkeep of roads, need to be paid
for from taxation then it is good for the whole community
that taxes are high enough to make this possible. If they are too
low, then the whole society will suffer. That then is the General
Will: that taxes should be high enough to provide a good level
of services.

When people get together and form a society, they become a
kind of person. Each individual is then part of a greater whole.
The way Rousseau felt that they could stay truly free in society
was to obey laws that were in line with the General Will. These
laws were created by a clever legislator. This person’s job was to
create a legal system that helped individuals keep in line with
the General Will, rather than pursuing selfish interests at others’
expense. True freedom, for Rousseau, is being part of a group of
people doing what is in the interest of that community. Your
wishes should coincide with what is best for all, and laws should
help you to avoid acting selfishly.

But what if you oppose what would be best for your city-
state? You, as an individual, may not want to conform with the
General Will. Rousseau had an answer here. But it’s not one that
most people would like to hear. He famously, and rather worry-
ingly, declared that if someone failed to recognize that obeying
a law was in the interest of the community, then that person
should be ‘forced to be free’. His point was that anyone who
opposed something that was really in the interest of their
society, while they might feel they were choosing freely, wouldn’t
genuinely be free unless they fell into line and conformed
with the General Will. How could you force someone to be free?
If I forced you to read the rest of this book, then that wouldn’t
be a free choice you had made, would it? Surely forcing someone
to do something is the opposite of letting them make a free
choice.

For Rousseau, however, this wasn’t a contradiction. The
person who couldn’t identify the right thing to do would
become freer by being forced to conform. Since everyone in a
society is part of this larger group, we need to recognize that
what we should do is follow the General Will, not our selfish
individual choices. On this view, only when we follow the
General Will are we truly free, even if we are forced to do so.
That is Rousseau’s belief, but many later thinkers, including
John Stuart Mill (see Chapter 24), have argued that political
freedom should be freedom for the individual to make his or
her own choices as far as possible. Indeed, there is something
slightly sinister about the idea of Rousseau, who had complained
about humanity being in chains, suggesting that forcing
someone to do something is another kind of freedom.

Rousseau spent much of his life travelling from country to
country to escape persecution. Immanuel Kant in contrast
barely left his home town, though the impact of his thought was
felt throughout Europe.