Rose-Tinted Reality
Immanuel Kant (1)

If you are wearing rose-tinted spectacles they will colour
every aspect of your visual experience. You may forget that you
are wearing them, but they will still affect what you see.
Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) believed that we are all walking
around understanding the world through a filter like this. The
filter is the human mind. It determines how we experience
everything and imposes a certain shape on that experience.
Everything we perceive takes place in time and space, and every
change has a cause. But according to Kant, that is not because of
the way reality ultimately is: it is a contribution of our minds.
We don’t have direct access to the way the world is. Nor can we
ever take the glasses off and see things as they truly are. We’re
stuck with this filter and without it we would be completely
unable to experience anything. All we can do is recognize that
it is there and understand how it affects and colours what we
experience.

Kant’s own mind was very ordered and logical. So was his life.
He never married and he imposed a strict pattern to each day.
In order not to waste any time, he had his servant wake him at
5 a.m. He would then drink some tea, smoke a pipe, and begin
work. He was extremely productive, writing numerous books
and essays. Then he would lecture at the university. In the after-
noon, he would go for a walk at 4.30 – exactly the same time
each day – up and down his street precisely eight times. In fact
people who lived in his home town of Königsberg (now
Kaliningrad) used to set their watches by his walk.

Like most philosophers, he spent his time trying to under-
stand our relation to reality. That, in essence, is what meta-
physics is about, and Kant was one of the greatest metaphysicians
to have lived. His particular interest was in the limits of thought,
the limits of what we can know and understand. This was an
obsession for him. In his most famous book The Critique of
Pure Reason (1781), he explored these limits, pushing right to
the boundaries of what makes sense. This book is far from an
easy read: Kant himself described it as both dry and obscure –
and he was right. Very few people would claim to understand it
all, and much of the reasoning is complex and jargon-heavy.
Reading it can feel like struggling through a dense thicket of
words with little sense of where you are going, and few glimpses
of daylight. But the core argument is clear enough.

What is reality like? Kant thought that we can’t ever have a
complete picture of the way things are. We’ll never learn
anything directly about what he calls the noumenal world,
whatever it is that lies behind appearances. Although he some-
times uses the word ‘noumenon’ (singular) and sometimes
‘noumena’ (plural) he shouldn’t have done (a point Hegel made
too, see Chapter 22): we can’t know whether reality is one thing
or many. Strictly speaking, we can’t know anything at all about
this noumenal world; at least we can’t get information about it
directly. We can know about the phenomenal world, though, the
world around us, the world we experience through our senses.
Look out of the window. What you can see is the phenomenal
world – grass, cars, sky, buildings, or whatever. You can’t see the
noumenal world, only the phenomenal one, but the noumenal
world is lurking behind all our experience. It is what exists at a
deeper level.

Some aspects of what exists, then, will always be beyond our
grasp. Yet we can, by rigorous thought, get a greater under-
standing than we could get from a purely scientific approach.
The main question Kant set himself to answer in The Critique of
Pure Reason was this: ‘How is synthetic a priori knowledge
possible?’ That question probably doesn’t make any sense to
you. It will take a little explaining. But the main idea is not as
difficult as it first seems. The first word to explain is ‘synthetic’.
In Kant’s philosophical language ‘synthetic’ is the opposite of
‘analytic’. ‘Analytic’ means true by definition. So, for example,
‘all men are male’ is true by definition. What this means is that
you can know that this sentence is true without making any
observations of actual men. You don’t need to check that they
are all male, as they wouldn’t be men if they weren’t male. No
fieldwork is required to come to this conclusion: you could sit
in an armchair and work it out. The word ‘men’ has the idea of
male built into it. It’s like the sentence ‘All mammals suckle their
young.’ Again, you don’t need to examine any mammals at all to
know that they all suckle their young, as that is part of the defi-
nition of a mammal. If you found something that seemed to be
a mammal, but which didn’t suckle its young, you’d know that it
couldn’t be a mammal. Analytic statements are really just about
definitions, so they don’t give us any new knowledge. They spell
out what we’ve assumed in the way we’ve defined a word.

Synthetic knowledge, in contrast, requires experience or
observation and it gives us new information, something that
isn’t simply contained in the meaning of the words or symbols
we use. We know, for example, that lemons taste bitter but only
through having tasted them (or because someone else tells us
about their experience of tasting lemons). It isn’t true by defini-
tion that lemons taste bitter – that is something that is learnt
through experience. Another synthetic statement would be ‘All
cats have tails.’ This is something that you would need to inves-
tigate to find out whether or not it was true. You can’t tell until
you look and see. In fact some cats, Manx cats, don’t have tails.
And some cats have lost their tails, but are still cats. The ques-
tion of whether all cats have tails is, then, a matter of fact about
the world, not about the definition of ‘cat’. It’s very different
from the statement ‘All cats are mammals’, which is just a matter
of definition and so is an analytic statement.

So where does that leave synthetic a priori knowledge? A
priori knowledge, as we have seen, is knowledge that is inde-
pendent of experience. We know it prior to experience, that is,
before we’ve had experience of it. In the seventeenth and eight-
eenth centuries there was a debate about whether or not we
know anything at all a priori. Roughly speaking, empiricists
(such as Locke) thought we didn’t; rationalists (such as
Descartes) thought we did. When Locke declared that there
were no innate ideas and that a child’s mind was a blank slate,
he was claiming that there was no a priori knowledge. This
makes it sound as if ‘a priori’ just means the same as ‘analytic’
(and for some philosophers the terms are interchangeable). But
for Kant it doesn’t. He thought that knowledge that reveals truth
about the world, yet is arrived at independently of experience,
is possible. That’s why he introduced the special category of
synthetic a priori knowledge to describe this. An example of
synthetic a priori knowledge, one that Kant himself used, was
the mathematical equation 7 + 5 = 12. Although many philoso-
phers have thought that such truths are analytic, a matter of the
definition of mathematical symbols, Kant believed that we are
able to know a priori that 7 + 5 is equal to 12 (we don’t need to
check this against objects or observations in the world). Yet at
the same time this gives us new knowledge: it is a synthetic
statement.

If Kant is right, this is a breakthrough. Before him philoso-
phers investigating the nature of reality treated it simply as
something beyond us that causes our experience. Then the
difficulty was how we could ever get access to that reality to say
anything meaningful about it that was more than just guess-
work. His great insight was that we could, by the power of
reason, discover features of our own minds that tint all our
experience. Sitting in an armchair thinking hard, we could
make discoveries about reality that had to be true, yet weren’t
just true by definition: they could be informative. He believed
that by logical argument he had done the equivalent of proving
that the world must necessarily appear pink to us. He’d not only
proved that we are wearing rose-tinted spectacles, but had also
made new discoveries about the various shades of pink that
these glasses contribute to all experience.

Having answered to his satisfaction the fundamental issues
about our relation to reality, Kant turned his attention to moral
philosophy.