Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

True Happiness
Aristotle

‘One swallow doesn’t make a summer.’ You might think this
phrase comes from William Shakespeare or another great poet.
It sounds as if it should. In fact it’s from Aristotle’s book The
Nicomachean Ethics, so called because he dedicated it to his son
Nicomachus. The point he was making was that just as it takes
more than the arrival of one swallow to prove that summer has
come, and more than a single warm day, so a few moments of
pleasure don’t add up to true happiness. Happiness for Aristotle
wasn’t a matter of short-term joy. Surprisingly, he thought that
children couldn’t be happy. This sounds absurd. If children can’t
be happy, who can? But it reveals how different his view of
happiness was from ours. Children are just beginning their
lives, and so haven’t had a full life in any sense. True happiness,
he argued, required a longer life.

Aristotle was Plato’s student, and Plato had been Socrates’. So
these three great thinkers form a chain: Socrates–Plato–Aristotle.
This is often the way. Geniuses don’t usually emerge from
nowhere. Most of them have had an inspirational teacher. But the
ideas of these three are very different from each other. They didn’t
simply parrot what they had been taught. Each had an original
approach. Put simply, Socrates was a great talker, Plato was a
superb writer, and Aristotle was interested in everything. Socrates
and Plato thought of the world we see as a pale reflection of true
reality that could only be reached by abstract philosophical
thought; Aristotle, in contrast, was fascinated by the details of
everything around him.

Unfortunately, almost all the writing by Aristotle that survives
is in the form of lecture notes. But these records of his thinking
have still made a huge impact on Western philosophy, even if
the writing style is often dry. But he wasn’t just a philosopher:
he was also fascinated by zoology, astronomy, history, politics
and drama.

Born in Macedonia in 384 bc, after studying with Plato, trav-
elling, and working as a tutor to Alexander the Great, Aristotle
set up his own school in Athens called the Lyceum. This was
one of the most famous centres of learning of the Ancient
World, a bit like a modern university. From there he sent out
researchers who returned with new information about every-
thing from political society to biology. He also started an
important library. In a famous Renaissance painting by Raphael,
The School of Athens, Plato points upwards to the world of the
Forms; in contrast, Aristotle is reaching out towards the world
in front of him.

Plato would have been content to philosophize from an
armchair; but Aristotle wanted to explore the reality we experi-
ence through the senses. He rejected his teacher’s Theory of
Forms, believing instead that the way to understand any general
category was to examine particular examples of it. So to
understand what a cat is he thought you needed to look at real
cats, not think abstractly about the Form of cat.

One question that Aristotle mulled over was ‘How should we
live?’ Socrates and Plato had both asked it before him. The need
to answer it is part of what draws people to philosophy in the
first place. Aristotle had his own answer. The simple version of
it is this: seek happiness.

But what does that phrase ‘seek happiness’ mean? Today most
people told to seek happiness would think of ways they could
enjoy themselves. Perhaps happiness for you would involve
exotic holidays, going to music festivals or parties, or spending
time with friends. It might also mean curling up with your
favourite book, or going to an art gallery. But although these
might be ingredients in a good life for Aristotle, he certainly
didn’t believe that the best way to live was to go out and seek
pleasure in these ways. That on its own wouldn’t be a good life,
in his view. The Greek word Aristotle used was eudaimonia
(pronounced ‘you-die-moania’, but meaning the opposite). This
is sometimes translated as ‘flourishing’ or ‘success’ rather than
‘happiness’. It is more than the sort of pleasant sensations you
can get from eating mango-flavoured ice cream or watching
your favourite sports team win. Eudaimonia isn’t about fleeting
moments of bliss or how you feel. It’s more objective than that.
This is quite hard to grasp as we are so used to thinking that
happiness is about how we feel and nothing more.

Think of a flower. If you water it, give it enough light, maybe
feed it a little, then it will grow and bloom. If you neglect it, keep
it in the dark, let insects nibble its leaves, allow it to dry out, it
will wilt and die, or at best end up as a very unattractive plant.
Human beings can flourish like plants too, though unlike plants
we make choices for ourselves: we decide what we want to do
and be.

Aristotle was convinced that there is such a thing as human
nature, that human beings, as he put it, have a function. There
is a way of living that suits us best. What sets us apart from
other animals and everything else is that we can think and
reason about what we ought to do. From this he concluded that
the best kind of life for a human being was one that used our
powers of reason.

Surprisingly, Aristotle believed that things you don’t know
about – and even events after your death – could contribute to
your eudaimonia. This sounds odd. Assuming there is no after-
life, how could anything that happens when you are no longer
around affect your happiness? Well, imagine that you are a parent
and your happiness in part rests on the hopes for your child’s
future. If, sadly, that child falls seriously ill after your own death,
then your eudaimonia will have been affected by this. In Aristotle’s
view your life will have got worse, even though you won’t actually
know about your child’s sickness and you are no longer alive. This
brings out well his idea that happiness is not just a matter of how
you feel. Happiness in this sense is your overall achievement in
life, something that can be affected by what happens to others you
care about. Events outside your control and knowledge affect
that. Whether you are happy or not depends partly on good luck.

The central question is: ‘What can we do to increase our
chance of eudaimonia?’ Aristotle’s answer was: ‘Develop the
right kind of character.’ You need to feel the right kind of
emotions at the right time and these will lead you to behave
well. In part this will be a matter of how you’ve been brought up,
since the best way to develop good habits is to practise them
from an early age. So luck comes in there too. Good patterns of
behaviour are virtues; bad ones are vices.

Think of the virtue of bravery in wartime. Perhaps a soldier
needs to put his own life at risk in order to save some civilians
from an attacking army. A foolhardy person has no concern
whatsoever for his own safety. He might rush into a dangerous
situation too, perhaps even when he does not need to, but that’s
not true bravery, only reckless risk-taking. At the other extreme,
a cowardly soldier can’t overcome his fear enough to act in an
appropriate way at all, and will be paralysed with terror at the
very moment when he is most needed. A brave or courageous
person in this situation, however, still feels fear, but is able to
conquer it and take action. Aristotle thought that every virtue
lies in between two extremes like this. Here bravery is halfway
between foolhardiness and cowardice. This is sometimes known
as Aristotle’s doctrine of the Golden Mean.

Aristotle’s approach to ethics isn’t just of historical interest.
Many modern philosophers believe that he was right about the
importance of developing the virtues, and that his view of what
happiness is was accurate and inspiring. Instead of looking to
increase our pleasure in life, they think, we should try to
become better people and do the right thing. That is what
makes a life go well.

All this makes it sound as if Aristotle was just interested in
individual personal development. But he wasn’t. Human beings
are political animals, he argued. We need to be able to live with
other people and we need a system of justice to cope with the
darker side of our nature. Eudaimonia can only be achieved in
relation to life in a society. We live together, and need to find
our happiness by interacting well with those around us in a
well-ordered political state.

There was one unfortunate side effect of Aristotle’s brilliance,
though. He was so intelligent, and his research was so thorough,
that many who read his work believed he was right about every-
thing. This was bad for progress, and bad for philosophy in the
tradition that Socrates had started. For hundreds of years after
his death most scholars accepted his views of the world as
unquestionably true. If they could prove that Aristotle had said
something, that was enough for them. This is what is sometimes
called ‘truth by authority’ – believing something must be true
because an important ‘authority’ figure has said it is.

What do you think would happen if you dropped a piece of
wood and a piece of heavy metal that was the same size from a
high place? Which would hit the ground first? Aristotle thought
that the heavier one, the one made of metal, would fall faster. In
fact, this isn’t what happens. They fall at the same speed. But
because Aristotle declared it to be true, throughout the medi-
eval period just about everyone believed that it must be true. No
more proof was needed. In the sixteenth century Galileo Galilei
supposedly dropped a wooden ball and a cannonball from the
leaning tower of Pisa to test this out. Both reached the ground
at the same time. So Aristotle was wrong. But it would have
been quite easy to show this much earlier.

Relying on someone else’s authority was completely against
the spirit of Aristotle’s research. It’s against the spirit of philos-
ophy too. Authority doesn’t prove anything by itself. Aristotle’s
own methods were investigation, research and clear reasoning.
Philosophy thrives on debate, on the possibility of being wrong,
on challenging views, and exploring alternatives. Fortunately, in
most ages there have been philosophers ready to think critically
about what other people tell them must be so. One philosopher
who tried to think critically about absolutely everything was the
sceptic Pyrrho.