What if Everyone Did That?
Immanuel Kant (2)

There’s a knock at your door. Standing in front of you is a young
man who obviously needs help. He’s injured and is bleeding.
You take him in and help him, make him feel comfortable and
safe and phone for an ambulance. This is obviously the right
thing to do. But if you help him just because you feel sorry for
him, according to Immanuel Kant, that wouldn’t be a moral
action at all. Your sympathy is irrelevant to the morality of your
action. That’s part of your character, but nothing to do with
right and wrong. Morality for Kant wasn’t just about what you
do, but about why you do it. Those who do the right thing don’t
do it simply because of how they feel: the decision has to be
based on reason, reason that tells you what your duty is, regard-
less of how you happen to feel.

Kant thought that emotions shouldn’t come into morality.
Whether we have them or not is largely a matter of luck. Some
people feel compassion and empathy, others don’t. Some are
mean and find it difficult to feel generous; others get great
enjoyment from giving away their money and possessions to
help other people. But being good should be something that any
reasonable person should be able to achieve through their own
choices. For Kant, if you help the young man because you know
it is your duty, then that is a moral action. It’s the right thing to
do because it is what everyone in the same situation should do.

This may sound strange to you. You probably think that
someone who felt sorry for the young man and helped him
because of that would have acted morally and was perhaps a
better person for feeling that emotion. That’s what Aristotle
would have thought too (see Chapter 2). But Kant was certain.
If you do something just because of how you feel that is not a
good action at all. Imagine someone who felt disgust when they
saw the young man, but still went ahead and helped him out of
duty. That person would be more obviously moral in Kant’s eyes
than someone who acted from compassion. That’s because the
disgusted person would clearly be acting from a sense of duty
because their emotions would be pushing in the completely
opposite direction, encouraging them not to help.

Think of the parable of the Good Samaritan. The Good
Samaritan helps a man in need he sees lying by the side of the
road. Everyone else just passes by. What made the Good
Samaritan good? If the Samaritan helped the man in need
because he thought it would get him into heaven, in Kant’s view
that wouldn’t have been a moral action at all. It would be
treating the man as a way of getting something – a means to an
end. If he helped him simply from compassion, as we’ve seen
already, that would be no good in Kant’s eyes. But if he helped
him because he recognized that it was his duty, and the right
thing for anyone in those circumstances to do, then Kant would
agree that the Good Samaritan was morally good.

Kant’s view of intentions is easier to accept than his view of the
emotions. Most of us do judge each other by what each of us is
trying to do, rather than just by what we succeed in doing. Think
of how you would feel about being accidentally knocked over by
a parent rushing to stop his young child from running into the
road. Compare that with how you would feel if someone else had
deliberately knocked you over for fun. The parent didn’t intend to
hurt you. The thug did. But, as the next example shows, having
good intentions isn’t enough to make your action moral.

There’s another knock at the door. You answer. It’s your best
friend who looks pale, worried and out of breath. She tells you
someone is chasing her, someone who wants to kill her. He’s got
a knife. You let her in, and she runs upstairs to hide. Moments
later there is yet another knock on the door. This time it is the
would-be killer and he has a crazy look in his eyes. He wants to
know where your friend is. Is she in the house? Is she hiding in
a cupboard? Where is she? In fact she is upstairs. But you tell a
lie. You say she has gone to the park. Surely you’ve done the
right thing by sending the would-be killer out to look for her in
the wrong place. You’ve probably saved your friend’s life. That
must be a moral act, mustn’t it?

Not according to Kant. Kant thought that you should never
lie – not in any circumstances. Not even to protect your friend
from a would-be murderer. It’s always morally wrong. No
exceptions. No excuses. That’s because you couldn’t make a
general principle that everyone should always lie when it suited
them. In this case if you lied and, without you knowing it, your
friend had gone out to the park, you would have been guilty of
helping the murderer. It would have been to some extent your
fault that your friend died.

This example is one Kant himself used. It shows how extreme
his view was. There were no exceptions to truth-telling or to any
moral duty. We all have an absolute duty to tell the truth or, as
he put it, a Categorical Imperative to do so. An imperative is an
order. Categorical imperatives contrast with hypothetical
imperatives. Hypothetical imperatives take the form ‘If you
want x, do y’. ‘If you want to avoid prison, don’t steal’ is an
example of a hypothetical imperative. Categorical imperatives
are different. They instruct you. In this case the Categorical
Imperative would simply be ‘Don’t steal!’ It is an order telling
you what your duty is. Kant thought that morality was a system
of categorical imperatives. Your moral duty is your moral duty
whatever the consequences and whatever the circumstances.

Kant believed that what makes us human is that, unlike other
animals, we can think reflectively about our choices. We would be
like machines if we couldn’t do things on purpose. It almost
always makes sense to ask a human being, ‘Why did you do that?’
We don’t just act out of instinct, but on the basis of reasons. Kant’s
way of putting this is in terms of the ‘maxims’ we act from. The
maxim is just the underlying principle, the answer to the ques-
tion, ‘Why did you do that?’ Kant believed that the maxim under-
lying your action was what really mattered. He argued that you
should only act on maxims that were universalizable. For some-
thing to be universalizable it has to apply to everyone. This just
means that you should only do things that would make sense for
anyone in the same situation as you to do. Always ask the ques-
tion: ‘What if everyone did that?’ Don’t make a special case for
yourself. Kant thought what this meant in practice was that you
shouldn’t use other people but should treat them with respect,
recognizing other people’s autonomy, their capacity as individuals
to make reasoned decisions for themselves. This reverence for the
dignity and worth of individual human beings is at the core of
modern human rights theory. It is Kant’s great contribution to
moral philosophy.

This is easier to understand through an example. Imagine you
own a shop and you sell fruit. When people buy fruit from you,
you are always polite and give them the correct change. Perhaps
you do this because you think it is good for business and will make
people more likely to come back to spend their money in your
shop. If that’s the only reason you give them the right change, then
that is a way of using them to get what you want. Kant believed
that because you couldn’t reasonably suggest that everyone treated
everyone else in this way, it wasn’t a moral form of behaviour. But
if you give them the correct change because you recognize that it
is your duty not to deceive others, then that is a moral action.
That’s because it is based on the maxim ‘Don’t deceive others’, a
maxim he thinks we can apply to every case. Deceiving people is
a way of using them to get what you want. It can’t be a moral prin-
ciple. If everyone deceived everyone else all trust would break
down. No one would believe anything anyone ever said.

Take another example Kant used: imagine that you are
completely broke. The banks won’t lend you money, you don’t
have anything that you can sell, and if you don’t pay your rent
you will be out on the street. You come up with a solution. You
go to a friend and ask to borrow some money. You promise to
pay him back even though you know that you won’t be able to
do so. This is your last resort, you can’t think of any other way
of paying your rent. Would that be acceptable? Kant argues that
borrowing from a friend without intending to return the money
must be immoral. Reason can show us this. It would be absurd
for everyone to borrow money and promise to pay it back even
though they knew they couldn’t. That, again, isn’t a universaliz-
able maxim. Ask the question, ‘What if everyone did that?’ If
everyone made false promises like this, promises would become
completely worthless. If it isn’t right for everyone, it can’t be
right for you. So you shouldn’t do it. It would be wrong.

This way of thinking about right and wrong based on cool
reasoning rather than emotion is very different from Aristotle’s
(see Chapter 2). For Aristotle, a truly virtuous person always
has the appropriate feelings and does the right thing as a result
of that. For Kant, feelings simply cloud the issue, making it
more difficult to see that someone is genuinely doing the right
thing, rather than just seeming to. Or to put a more positive
spin on this: Kant made morality available to every rational
person, whether or not they were fortunate enough to have feel-
ings that motivated them to act well.

Kant’s moral philosophy stands in stark contrast to that of
Jeremy Bentham, the topic of the next chapter. Where Kant
argued that some actions are wrong whatever consequences
follow from them, Bentham claimed that it was consequences,
and only consequences, that mattered.