Glimpses of Reality
Arthur Schopenhauer

Life is painful and it would be better not to have been born.
Few people have such a pessimistic outlook, but Arthur
Schopenhauer (1788–1860) did. According to him, we are all
caught up in a hopeless cycle of wanting things, getting them,
and then wanting more things. It doesn’t stop until we die.
Whenever we seem to get what we want, we start wanting some-
thing else. You might think you would be content if you were a
millionaire, but you wouldn’t be for long. You’d want something
you hadn’t got. Human beings are like that. We’re never satisfied,
never stop craving for more than we have. It’s all very depressing.

But Schopenhauer’s philosophy isn’t quite as dark as this
sounds. He thought that if we could only recognize the true
nature of reality, we would behave very differently and might
avoid some of the bleaker features of the human condition. His
message was very close to the Buddha’s. The Buddha taught that
all life involves suffering but that at a deep level there is no such
thing as ‘the self ’: if we recognize that, we can achieve enlight-
enment. This similarity was no coincidence. Unlike most
Western philosophers, Schopenhauer had read widely in Eastern
philosophy. He even had a statue of the Buddha on his desk,
next to one of his other great influences, Immanuel Kant.

Unlike the Buddha and Kant, Schopenhauer was a gloomy,
difficult, vain man. When he got a job as a lecturer in Berlin, he
was so convinced of his own genius that he insisted that his
lectures should take place at exactly the same time as Hegel’s.
This wasn’t his greatest idea, as Hegel was very popular with
students. Hardly anyone showed up to Schopenhauer’s lectures;
Hegel’s, meanwhile, were packed. Schopenhauer later left the
university and lived for the rest of his life on inherited money.

His most important book, The World as Will and Representation,
was first published in 1818, but he kept working on it for years,
producing a much longer version in 1844. The main idea at
the heart of it is quite simple. Reality has two aspects. It exists
both as Will and as Representation. Will is the blind driving
force that is found in absolutely everything that exists. It is the
energy that makes plants and animals grow, but it is also the force
that causes magnets to point north, and crystals to grow in
chemical compounds. It is present in every part of nature. The
other aspect, the World as Representation, is the world as we
experience it.

The World as Representation is our construction of reality in
our minds. It is what Kant called the phenomenal world. Look
around you now. Perhaps you can see trees, people or cars
through a window, or this book in front of you; perhaps you can
hear birds or traffic or noises in another room. What you are
experiencing through your senses is the World as Representation.
That is your way of making sense of everything and it requires
your consciousness. Your mind organizes your experience to
make sense of it all. This World as Representation is the world
we live in. But, like Kant, Schopenhauer believed that there was
a deeper reality that exists beyond your experiences too, beyond
the world of appearances. Kant called that the noumenal world,
and he thought we had no direct access to it. For Schopenhauer,
the World as Will was a bit like Kant’s noumenal world, though
there were important differences.

Kant wrote about noumena, the plural of noumenon. He
thought that reality could have more than one part. It is not clear
how Kant knew this, given that he had declared that the noumenal
world was inaccessible to us. Schopenhauer in contrast held that
we couldn’t assume that the noumenal reality was divided at all,
since that kind of division requires space and time, which Kant
believed were contributed by the individual mind rather than
existing in reality itself. Instead Schopenhauer described the
World as Will as a single, unified, directionless force behind
everything that is. We can glimpse this World as Will through our
own actions and also through our experience of art.

Stop reading this and put your hand on your head. What
happened? Someone watching you would just see your hand
going up and resting on your head. You can see that too if you
look in the mirror. This is a description of the phenomenal
world, the World as Representation. According to Schopenhauer,
though, there is an inner aspect to our experience of moving
our body, something that we can feel in a different way from our
experience of the phenomenal world in general. We don’t expe-
rience the World as Will directly, but we do come very close to
that when we perform deliberate actions, when we will bodily
actions, make them happen. That’s why he chose the word ‘Will’
to describe reality, even though it is only in the human situation
that this energy has any connection whatsoever with doing
something deliberately – plants don’t grow deliberately, nor do
chemical reactions happen deliberately. So it’s important to
realize that the word ‘Will’ is different from ordinary uses of the
term.

When someone ‘wills’ something they have an aim in mind:
they’re trying to do something. But that is not at all what
Schopenhauer means when he describes reality at the level of
the World as Will. The Will (with a capital W) is aimless, or, as
he sometimes puts it, ‘blind’. It isn’t attempting to bring about
any particular result. It doesn’t have any point or goal. It is
just this great surge of energy that is in every natural phenom-
enon as well as in our conscious acts of willing things. For
Schopenhauer there is no God to give it direction. Nor is the
Will itself God. The human situation is that we, like all reality,
are part of this meaningless force.

Yet there are some experiences that can make life bearable.
These come mostly from art. Art provides a still point so that,
for a short time, we can escape the endless cycle of striving and
desire. Music is the best art form for this. According to
Schopenhauer that’s because music is a copy of the Will itself.
This, he felt, explained music’s power to move us so profoundly.
If you listen to a Beethoven symphony in the right frame of
mind you aren’t just being stimulated emotionally: you are
glimpsing reality as it truly is.

No other philosopher has given such a central place to the arts,
so it is not surprising that Schopenhauer is popular with creative
people of various kinds. Composers and musicians love him
because he believed that music was the most important of all the
arts. His ideas have also appealed to novelists including Leo
Tolstoy, Marcel Proust, Thomas Mann and Thomas Hardy. Dylan
Thomas even wrote a poem ‘The force that through the green
fuse drives the flower’ which was inspired by Schopenhauer’s
description of the World as Will.

Schopenhauer didn’t just describe reality and our relation to
it. He also had views about how we should live. Once you realize
that we are all part of one energy force, and that individual
people exist only at the level of the World as Representation,
this should change what you do. For Schopenhauer, harming
other people is a kind of self-injury. This is the foundation of all
morality. If I kill you, I destroy a part of the life force that joins
us all together. When someone harms another person it is like a
snake biting its tail without knowing that it is sinking its fangs
into its own flesh. So the basic morality that Schopenhauer
taught was one of compassion. Properly understood, other
people aren’t external to me. I care what happens to you because
in a way you are part of what we are all part of: the World
as Will.

That’s Schopenhauer’s official moral position. It is question-
able, though, whether he achieved anything like this degree of
concern for other people himself. On one occasion, an old
woman chatting outside his door made him so angry that he
pushed her down the stairs. She was injured, and a court
ordered Schopenhauer to pay compensation to her for the rest
of her life. When she died some years later, Schopenhauer
showed no compassion: instead he scribbled the joke-rhyme
‘obit anus, abit onus’ (Latin for ‘the old woman dies, the burden
goes’) on her death certificate.

There is another, more extreme method for coming to terms
with the cycle of desire. To avoid getting caught up in all this,
simply turn away from the world altogether and become an
ascetic: live a life of sexual chastity and poverty. This, he felt,
would be the ideal way to cope with existence. It is the solution
many Eastern religions opt for. Schopenhauer, however, never
became an ascetic, despite withdrawing from social life as he
grew older. For most of his life he enjoyed company, had affairs,
ate well. It is tempting to say that he was a hypocrite. Indeed, the
vein of pessimism that runs through his writing is so deep in
places that some readers thought that if he had been sincere he
would have killed himself.

The great Victorian philosopher John Stuart Mill, in contrast,
was an optimist. He argued that rigorous thought and discus-
sion could spur social change and bring about a better world, a
world in which more people could lead happy and fulfilled lives.