Space to Grow
John Stuart Mill

Imagine that you had been kept away from other children for
most of your childhood. Instead of spending time playing, you
would have been learning Greek and algebra, taught by a private
tutor, or you’d be in conversation with highly intelligent adults.
How would you have turned out?

This is more or less what happened to John Stuart Mill
(1806–73). He was an educational experiment. His father, James
Mill, a friend of Jeremy Bentham, shared John Locke’s view that
a young child’s mind was empty, like a blank slate. James Mill
was convinced that if you brought a child up in the right way,
there was a good chance that he or she would develop into a
genius. So James taught his son John at home, making sure that
he didn’t waste any time playing with children his own age or
learning bad habits from them. But this wasn’t simply cram-
ming, forced memorization, or anything like that. James taught
using Socrates’ method of cross-questioning, encouraging his
son to explore the ideas he was learning rather than just parrot
them.

The stunning result was that by the age of three John was
studying Ancient Greek. By six he had written a history of
Rome, and aged seven he could understand Plato’s dialogues in
the original language. At eight he started to learn Latin. By 12
he had a thorough appreciation of history, economics and poli-
tics, could solve complex mathematical equations and had a
passionate and sophisticated interest in science. He was a
prodigy. In his twenties he was already one of the most brilliant
thinkers of his age, though he never really got over his strange
childhood and remained lonely and a bit distant throughout
his life.

Nevertheless, he had turned into a kind of genius. So his
father’s experiment had worked. He became a campaigner
against injustice, an early feminist (he was arrested for promoting
birth control), a politician, a journalist, and a great philosopher,
perhaps the greatest philosopher of the nineteenth century.

Mill had been brought up as a utilitarian, and Bentham’s
influence was immense. The Mills would stay at Bentham’s
house in the Surrey countryside each summer. But, although
Mill agreed with Bentham that the right action is always the one
that produces the most happiness, he came to believe that his
teacher’s account of happiness as pleasure was too crude. So the
younger man developed his own version of the theory, one that
distinguished between higher and lower pleasures.

Given the choice, would it be better to be a contented pig
rolling about in a muddy sty and chomping through the food in
its trough, or a sad human being? Mill thought it was obvious
that we would choose to be a sad human rather than a happy
pig. But that goes against what Bentham thought. Bentham,
you will remember, says that all that counts are pleasurable
experiences, no matter how they are produced. Mill disagreed.
He thought that you could have different kinds of pleasure and
that some were much better than others, so much better that no
quantity of the lower pleasure could ever match the smallest
quantity of the higher one. Lower pleasures, such as those an
animal can experience, would never challenge the higher, intel-
lectual pleasures, like the pleasure of reading a book or listening
to a concert. Mill went further, and said that it would be better
to be a dissatisfied Socrates than a satisfied fool. That’s because
the philosopher Socrates was capable of gaining so much more
subtle pleasures from his thinking than the fool could ever
achieve.

Why believe Mill? His answer was that anyone who has expe-
rienced both higher and lower pleasures prefers the higher
ones. The pig can’t read or listen to classical music, so its
opinion on this wouldn’t count. If a pig could read it would
prefer reading to rolling in mud.

That’s what Mill thought. But some people have pointed out
that he assumed that everyone was like him in preferring
reading to rolling in the mud. Worse still, as soon as Mill intro-
duces different qualities of happiness (higher and lower) as well
as different quantities, it becomes much harder to see how you
could ever calculate what to do. One of the great virtues of
Bentham’s approach was its simplicity, with every kind of
pleasure and pain measured in the same currency. Mill gives no
way of working out an exchange rate between the different
currencies of higher and lower pleasures.

Mill applied his utilitarian thinking to all aspects of life. He
thought that human beings are a bit like trees. If you don’t give
a tree enough space to develop, it will be twisted and weak. But
in the right position it can fulfil its potential and reach a great
height and spread. Similarly, in the right circumstances, human
beings flourish, and that produces good consequences not just
for the individual concerned, but for the whole of society –
it maximizes happiness. In 1859 he published a short but
inspiring book defending his view that giving each person
space to develop as they saw fit was the best way to organize
society. That book is called On Liberty and it is still widely read
today.

Paternalism, from the Latin pater meaning father, is forcing
someone to do something for their own good (though it could
equally have been maternalism from mater, the Latin for
mother). If as a child you were made to eat your greens then you
will understand this concept very well. Eating green vegetables
doesn’t do anyone else any good, but your parents still make you
do it for your own good. Mill thought paternalism was fine
when it was directed at children: children need to be protected
from themselves and have their behaviour controlled in various
ways. But paternalism towards adults in a civilized society was
unacceptable. The only justification for it was when an adult
risked harming someone else by their actions or if they had
severe psychiatric problems.

Mill’s message was simple. It is known as the Harm Principle.
Every adult should be free to live as he or she pleases as long as
no one else is harmed in the process. This was a challenging
idea in Victorian England when many people assumed that part
of the role of government was to impose good moral values on
the people. Mill disagreed. He thought that greater happiness
would come from individuals having greater freedom in how
they behaved. And it was not just government telling people
what to do that worried Mill. He hated what he called ‘the
tyranny of the majority’, the way that social pressures worked to
prevent many people from doing what they wanted to do or
become.

Others may think they know what will make you happy. But
they are usually wrong. You know much better than they do
what you really want to do with your life. And even if you don’t,
Mill argued, it is better to let each of us make our own mistakes
than to force us to conform with one way of living. This is
consistent with his utilitarianism since he believed that
increasing individual freedom produces more happiness overall
than restricting it does.

According to Mill (who was one himself), geniuses, even
more than the rest of us, need freedom in order to develop.
They rarely fit into society’s expectations about how they should
behave and often seem eccentric. If you cramp their develop-
ment, then we all lose out because they probably won’t make the
contributions to society that they might otherwise have done.
So, if you want to achieve the greatest possible amount of happi-
ness, let people get on with their lives without interfering with
them; unless, of course, they risk harming other people by their
actions. If you find what they are doing offensive that is not
a good reason for preventing them from living this way. Mill
was very clear on this point: offence should not be confused
with harm.

Mill’s approach has some quite disturbing consequences.
Imagine a man with no family who decides that he will drink
two bottles of vodka every night. It is very easy to see that he is
drinking himself to death. Should the law intervene to stop
him? No, says Mill, not unless he risks harming someone else.
You can argue with him, tell him he is destroying himself. But
no one should force him to change his ways; nor should govern-
ment prevent him drinking his life away. That’s his free choice.
It wouldn’t be his free choice if he was looking after a young
child, but as he has no one depending on him, he can do what
he likes.

As well as freedom in how to live, Mill thought it was vital
that everyone was given freedom to think and speak as they
liked. Open discussion was of great benefit to society, he felt,
because it forced people to think hard about what they believed.
If you don’t have your views challenged by people with opposing
views, then you will probably end up holding them as ‘dead
dogmas’, prejudices that you can’t really defend. He argued for
free speech up to the point at which it incited violence. A jour-
nalist, he believed, should be free to write an editorial in which
he declared that ‘corn-dealers are starvers of the poor’, but if he
waved a placard with the same words on it while standing on
the steps of a corn-dealer’s house in front of an angry mob, that
would be an incitement to violence and so forbidden by Mill’s
Harm Principle.

Many people disagreed with Mill. Some thought his approach
to freedom was too centred on the idea that what matters is how
individuals feel about their lives (it is much more individual-
istic, for example, than Rousseau’s concept of freedom, see
Chapter 18). Others saw him as opening the doors to a permis-
sive society that would wreck morality for ever. James Fitzjames
Stephen, one of his contemporaries, argued that most people
should be forced down a narrow channel and not given too
many choices about how they live, because so many, given free
rein, would end up making bad and self-destructive decisions
for themselves.

One area in which Mill was particularly radical at the time he
wrote was in his feminism. In England in the nineteenth
century married women were not allowed to own property, and
had little legal protection against violence and rape by their
husbands. Mill argued in The Subjection of Women (1869) that
the sexes should be treated equally both in law and in society
more generally. Some around him claimed that women were
naturally inferior to men. He asked how they could possibly
know this when women had so often been prevented from
reaching their full potential: they were kept away from higher
education and many professions. Above all, he wanted greater
equality of the sexes. Marriage should be a friendship between
equals, he argued. His own marriage to the widow Harriet
Taylor, which came very late in their lives, was like this and it
brought both great happiness. They had been intimate friends
(and perhaps even lovers) while her first husband was alive, but
Mill had had to wait until 1851 to become her second. She
helped him write both On Liberty and The Subjection of Women,
though, sadly, she died before either was published.

On Liberty was first published in 1859. In the same year
another even more important book appeared: Charles Darwin’s
On the Origin of Species.