Unintelligent Design
Charles Darwin

‘Are you related to monkeys on your grandmother’s or your
grandfather’s side?’ This was Bishop Samuel Wilberforce’s cheeky
question in a famous debate with Thomas Henry Huxley in
Oxford’s Museum of Natural History in 1860. Huxley was
defending the views of Charles Darwin (1809–82). Wilberforce’s
question was meant to be both an insult and a joke. But it back-
fired. Huxley muttered under his breath, ‘Thank you God for
delivering him into my hands’, and replied that he would rather
be related to an ape than to a human being who held back debate
by making fun of scientific ideas. He might just as well have
explained that he was descended from monkey-like ancestors on
both sides – not very recently, but some time in the past. That’s
what Darwin claimed. Everyone has them in their family tree.

This view caused a great stir almost from the moment his
book On the Origin of Species was published in 1859. After that
it was no longer possible to think of human beings as completely
different from the rest of the animal kingdom. Human beings
weren’t special any more: they were just part of nature like any
other animal. This might not come as a surprise to you, but it
did to most Victorians.

You might think that all it would take to recognize our close-
ness to apes would be a few minutes spent in the company of
a chimpanzee or gorilla or perhaps even a hard look in the
mirror. But in Darwin’s day more or less everyone assumed that
human beings were very different from any other animal and
the idea that we shared distant relatives with them was ridicu-
lous. There were plenty of people who thought that Darwin’s
ideas were crazy and the work of the devil. Some Christians
clung to their belief that the Book of Genesis gave the true
story of how God created all the animals and plants in six
busy days. God had designed the world and everything in it,
each with its proper place for all time. These Christians believed
that every species of animal and plant had remained the same
since the Creation. Even today some people still refuse to
believe that evolution is the process by which we came to be
what we are.

Darwin was a biologist and a geologist, not a philosopher. So
you might wonder why there is a chapter about him in this
book. The reason it’s here is that his theory of evolution by
natural selection and its modern versions have had a profound
impact on how philosophers – as well as scientists – think about
humanity. It is the most influential scientific theory of all time.
The contemporary philosopher Daniel Dennett has called it ‘the
single best idea anyone has ever had’. The theory explains how
human beings and the plants and animals around them have
come to be as they are and how they are all still changing.

One result of this scientific theory was that it became easier
than ever before to believe that there is no God. The zoologist
Richard Dawkins has written, ‘I can’t imagine being an atheist
at any time before 1859, when Darwin’s On the Origin of Species
was published.’ There were atheists, of course, before 1859 –
David Hume, the subject of Chapter 17, was probably one – but
there were many more afterwards. You don’t have to be an
atheist to believe that evolution is true: many religious believers
are Darwinists. But they can’t be Darwinists and believe that
God created all species exactly as they are today.

As a young man, Darwin went on a five-year voyage on HMS
Beagle, visiting South America, Africa and Australia. This was
the adventure of his lifetime – as it would be for anyone. Before
that he hadn’t been a particularly promising student, and no one
would have expected him to make such an impressive contribu-
tion to human thought. He was no genius at school. His father
was convinced that he was going to be a waster, and a disgrace
to his family because he spent so much of his time hunting and
shooting rats. As a young man he’d started training as a doctor
in Edinburgh, but when that didn’t work out, he switched to
studying divinity at Cambridge University, intending to become
a vicar. In his spare time he was an enthusiastic naturalist,
collecting plants and insects, but there were no signs that he was
going to be the greatest biologist in history. In many ways he
seemed a bit lost. He didn’t really know what he wanted to do.
But the voyage of the Beagle transformed him.

The trip was a scientific expedition around the world, partly
to map the coastlines of the places the ship visited. Despite his
lack of qualifications, Darwin took on the role of official bota-
nist, but he also made detailed observations of rocks, fossils and
animals wherever they landed. The small ship quickly filled up
with the samples he collected. Luckily he was able to send most
of this collection back to England where it was stored ready for
investigation.

By far the most valuable part of the voyage turned out to be the
visit to the Galapagos Islands, a group of volcanic islands in the
Pacific Ocean roughly 500 miles from South America. The Beagle
reached the Galapagos Islands in 1835. There were plenty of
interesting animals to examine there, including giant tortoises
and sea-loving iguanas. Though it wasn’t obvious to him at the
time, the most important for Darwin’s theory of evolution were a
range of rather drab-looking finches. He shot a number of these
small birds and sent them home for further examination. Close
study later revealed that there were thirteen distinct species. The
small differences between them were mostly in their beaks.

After his return, Darwin abandoned his plans of becoming a
vicar. While he’d been travelling the fossils, plants and dead
animals he’d sent back had made him quite famous in the scien-
tific world. He became a full-time naturalist and spent many
years working on his theory of evolution as well as becoming a
world expert on barnacles, those small limpet-like animals that
cling to rocks and the hulls of ships. The more he thought about
it, the more he was convinced that species evolved through a
natural process and were constantly changing rather than fixed
for all time. Eventually he came up with the suggestion that
plants and animals that were well suited to their environment
were more likely to survive long enough to pass on some of
their characteristics to their young. Over long periods this
pattern produced plants and animals that seemed to have been
designed to live in the environments in which they were found.
The Galapagos Islands provided some of the best evidence of
evolution in action. For example, at some point in history, he
thought, finches had found their way there from the mainland,
perhaps carried by strong winds. Through many thousands of
generations, the birds on each island had then gradually adapted
to where they were living.

Not all birds of the same species are identical. There’s usually
quite a lot of variety. One bird might have a slightly more
pointed beak than another, for instance. If having this kind of
beak helped the bird survive longer, it would be more likely to
breed. For example, a bird that has a beak that is good for eating
seeds would do well on an island where there were many seeds
around, but probably not so well on an island where the main
source of food is from nuts that needed to be cracked. A bird
that had a harder time finding food because of its beak shape
would find it difficult to survive long enough to mate and
produce offspring. That made it less likely that that type of beak
would be passed on. Birds with beaks that suited the available
food supplies would be more likely to pass that feature on to
their offspring. So on a seed-rich island, the birds with good
beaks for eating seeds came to dominate. Over many thousands
of years this led to a new species evolving, one that was very
different from the original type that landed on the island. Birds
with the wrong types of beak would have gradually died out. On
an island with different conditions a slightly different sort of
finch would evolve. Over long periods of time the birds’ beaks
became better and better adapted to their environment. The
varying environments on different islands meant that the birds
that thrived were the ones best suited to that place.

Other people before Darwin, including his grandfather
Erasmus Darwin, had suggested that animals and plants had
evolved. What Charles Darwin added was the theory of adapta-
tion by natural selection, the process that leads the best-adapted
to survive to pass on their characteristics.

This struggle for survival explains everything. It isn’t just a
struggle between members of different species; members of the
same species struggle against each other too. They are all in
competition to pass on their own characteristics to the next
generation. This is how features of animals and plants that look
as if they have been invented by an intelligent mind have come
about.

Evolution is a mindless process. It has no consciousness or
God behind it – or at least it doesn’t need to have anything like
this behind it. It is impersonal: like a machine that keeps
working automatically. It is blind in the sense that it doesn’t
know where it is going and it doesn’t think about the animals
and plants that it produces. Nor does it care about them. When
we see its products – plants and animals – it’s difficult not to
think of them as cleverly designed by someone. But that would
be a mistake. Darwin’s theory provides a much simpler and
more elegant explanation. It also explains why there are so
many types of life, with different species adapting to the parts of
the environment they live in.

In 1858 Darwin still hadn’t got round to publishing his find-
ings. He was working on his book – he wanted to get it just
right. Another naturalist, Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913),
wrote to him sketching his own, very similar theory of evolu-
tion. This coincidence nudged Darwin into going public with
his ideas, first with a presentation to the Linnean Society in
London, and then the next year, 1859, with his book On the
Origin of Species. After devoting a large part of his life to
working out his theory, Darwin didn’t want Wallace to get there
before him. The book instantly made him famous.

Some people who read it were unconvinced. The captain of
the Beagle, Robert FitzRoy, for example, a scientist himself and
inventor of a system of weather forecasting, was a devout
believer in the biblical story of Creation. He was dismayed that
he had played a part in undermining religious belief, and
wished he’d never taken Darwin on board his ship. Even today,
there are creationists who believe that the story told in Genesis
is true and a literal description of the origin of life. But among
scientists there is overwhelming confidence that Darwin’s
theory explains the basic process of evolution. This is partly
because since Darwin’s time there has been a mass of new
observations in support of the theory and of later versions of it.
Genetics, for example, has given a detailed explanation of how
inheritance works. We know about genes and chromosomes
and about the chemical processes involved in passing on partic-
ular qualities. The fossil evidence today is also far more
convincing than it was in Darwin’s day. For all these reasons the
theory of evolution by natural selection is much more than ‘just
a hypothesis’: it is a hypothesis that has a very substantial weight
of evidence in its support.

Darwinism may have more or less destroyed the traditional
Design Argument and shaken many people’s religious faith. But
Darwin himself seems to have kept an open mind on the ques-
tion of whether or not God exists. In a letter to a fellow scientist
he declared that we aren’t really up to coming to a conclusion on
the issue: ‘the whole subject is too profound for human intellect,’
he explained: ‘A dog might as well speculate on the mind of
Newton.’

A thinker who was prepared to speculate about religious
faith, and, unlike Darwin, made it central to his life’s work, was
Søren Kierkegaard.