So What?
C.S. Peirce and William James

A squirrel is clinging tightly to the trunk of a large tree. On the
other side of the tree, close up against the trunk is a hunter.
Every time the hunter moves to his left, the squirrel moves
quickly to its left too, scurrying further round the trunk,
hanging on with its claws. The hunter keeps trying to find the
squirrel, but it manages to keep just out of his sight. This goes
on for hours, and the hunter never gets a glimpse of the squirrel.
Would it be true to say that the hunter is circling the squirrel?
Think about it. Does the hunter actually circle his prey?

It’s possible that your answer will be ‘Why do you want to
know?’ The American philosopher and psychologist William
James (1842–1910) came across a group of friends arguing
about this same example. He would have had some sympathy
with your response. His friends couldn’t agree on the answer
but were discussing the question as if there were an absolute
truth to the matter that they could uncover. Some said yes, the
hunter was circling the squirrel; others said no, he certainly
wasn’t. They thought James might be able to help them answer
the question one way or the other. His response was based on
his pragmatist philosophy.

This is what he said. If you mean by circling that the man is
first north, then east, then south, then west of the squirrel, which
is one meaning of ‘circling’, then the answer is that it is true that
the hunter circles the squirrel. He does go round the squirrel in
this sense. But if you mean that the hunter is first of all in front
of the squirrel, then to the squirrel’s right, then behind the
squirrel and then to its left, another meaning of ‘circling’, then
the answer is no. Because the squirrel’s belly is always facing the
hunter, the hunter doesn’t go round the squirrel in that sense.
They are always face to face with each other with the tree in
between them as they dance round out of each other’s sight.

The point of this example is to show that pragmatism is
concerned with practical consequences – the ‘cash value’ of
thought. If nothing hangs on the answer, it doesn’t really matter
what you decide. It all depends why you want to know and what
difference it will actually make. Here, there is no truth beyond
particular human concerns with the question, and the precise
ways we use the verb ‘to circle’ in different contexts. If there is
no practical difference, then there is no truth of the matter. It’s
not that truth is somehow ‘out there’ waiting for us to find it.
Truth for James was simply what works, what has a beneficial
impact on our lives.

Pragmatism is a philosophical approach that became popular
in the United States in the late nineteenth century. It started with
the American philosopher and scientist C.S. Peirce (pronounced
‘purse’), who wanted to make philosophy more scientific than it
had been. Peirce (1839–1914) believed that for a statement to be
true there had to be some possible experiment or observation to
support it. If you say ‘Glass is brittle’ what this means is that
if you hit it with a hammer it will break into tiny fragments.
That’s what makes the statement ‘Glass is brittle’ true. There
isn’t some invisible property of ‘brittleness’ the glass has apart
from this fact about what happens if you hit it. ‘Glass is brittle’
is a true statement because of these practical consequences.
‘Glass is transparent’ is true because you can see through glass,
not because of some mysterious property in the glass. Peirce
hated abstract theories that didn’t make any difference in prac-
tice. He thought they were nonsense. Truth for him is what
we would end up with if we could run all the experiments
and investigations we would ideally like to. This is very close
to A.J. Ayer’s logical positivism which is the subject of
Chapter 32.

Peirce’s work was not widely read. But William James’ was.
He was an excellent writer – as good as or better than his
famous brother, the novelist and short story writer Henry
James. William had spent many hours discussing pragmatism
with Peirce when they had both been lecturers at Harvard
University. James developed his own version of it that he popu-
larized in essays and lectures. For him, pragmatism boils down
to this: truth is what works. He was, though, a bit vague about
what ‘what works’ meant. Although he was an early psycholo-
gist, he wasn’t interested just in science, but also in questions
about right and wrong, and religion too. In fact his most contro-
versial writing was about religion.

James’ approach is very different from the traditional view of
truth. On that view truth means correspondence to the facts.
What makes a sentence true on the correspondence theory
of truth is that it accurately describes how the world is. ‘The
cat is on the mat’ is true when the cat is actually sitting on
the mat, and false when it isn’t; when, for example, it is out in
the garden looking for mice. According to James’ pragmatic
theory of truth, what makes the sentence ‘The cat is on the mat’
true is that believing it produces useful practical results for us.
It works for us. So, for example, believing ‘the cat is on the mat’
gives the result that we know not to play with our pet hamster
on that mat until the cat has gone somewhere else.

Now, when using an example like ‘The cat is on the mat’, the
results of this pragmatic theory of truth don’t seem particularly
disconcerting or important. But try it with the sentence ‘God
exists.’ What would you expect James to say about that?

Is it true that God exists? What do you think? The main
answers are ‘Yes, it’s true that God exists’, ‘No it’s not true that
God exists’, and ‘I don’t know.’ Presumably you gave one of those
answers if you bothered to answer my question before reading
this. These positions have names: theism, atheism and agnosti-
cism. Those who say ‘Yes, it’s true that God exists’ usually mean
that there is a Supreme Being somewhere and that the statement
‘God exists’ would be true even if there were no human beings
alive and even if no human beings had ever existed. ‘God
exists’ and ‘God doesn’t exist’ are statements that are either
true or false. But it’s not what we think about them that makes
them true or false. They are true or false whatever we think
about them. We just hope we get it right when we think
about them.

James gave a rather different analysis of ‘God exists.’ He
thought that the statement was true. What made it true was that
it was in his opinion a useful belief to have. In coming to that
conclusion he focused on the benefits of believing that God
exists. This was an important issue for him and he wrote a book,
The Varieties of Religious Experience (1902), which examined a
wide range of effects that religious belief can have. For James, to
say that ‘God exists’ is a true statement is simply to say that it is
somehow good for the believer to believe it. This is quite a
surprising position to take. It’s a bit like Pascal’s argument that
we looked at in Chapter 12: that agnostics stood to benefit from
believing that God existed. Pascal, though, believed that ‘God
exists’ was made true by the real existence of God, not by
human beings feeling better when they believe in God, or
becoming better people because they have this belief. His Wager
was just a way of getting agnostics to believe what he thought
was true. For James, it is the supposed fact that belief in God
‘works satisfactorily’ that makes ‘God exists’ true.

To get clear about this, take the sentence ‘Santa Claus exists.’
Is that true? Does a large, jolly red-faced man come down your
chimney every Christmas Eve with a sack of presents? Don’t
read the rest of this paragraph if you believe that this does actu-
ally happen. I’m guessing, though, that you don’t think Santa
Claus exists even if you think that it would be nice if he did. The
British philosopher Bertrand Russell (see Chapter 31) made fun
of William James’ pragmatic theory of truth by saying it meant
that James had to believe ‘Santa Claus exists’ is true. His reason
for saying this was that James thinks that all that makes a
sentence true is the effect on the believer of believing it. And for
most children, at least, believing in Santa Claus is great. It
makes Christmas a very special day for them; it makes them
behave well; it gives them a focus in the days coming up to
Christmas. It works for them. So because believing it works in
some sense, that seems to make it true according to James’
theory. The trouble is there is a difference between what would
be nice if it were true and what is actually true. James could have
pointed out that while believing in Santa Claus works for young
children, it doesn’t work for everyone. If parents believed that
Santa was going to deliver presents on Christmas Eve then they
wouldn’t go out and buy presents for their children. It would
only take until Christmas morning to realize that something
wasn’t working with the belief ‘Santa Claus exists’. But does that
mean it’s true for small children that Santa Claus exists, but false
for most adults? And doesn’t that make truth subjective, a
matter of how we feel about things rather than the way the
world is?

Take another example. How do I know that other people have
minds at all? I know from my own experience that I’m not just
some kind of a zombie with no internal life. I have my own
thoughts, intentions and so forth. But how can I tell whether
people around me have thoughts at all? Perhaps they aren’t
conscious. Couldn’t they just be zombies acting automatically
with no minds of their own? This is the Problem of Other
Minds that philosophers have worried about for a long time. It
is a difficult puzzle to solve. James’ answer was that it must be
true that other people have minds, otherwise we wouldn’t
be able to satisfy our desire to be recognized and admired by
other people. This is an odd sort of argument. It makes his
pragmatism sound very much like wishful thinking – believing
what you’d like to be true whether or not it is actually true.
But just because it feels good to believe that when someone
praises you they are a conscious being and not a robot
doesn’t make them a conscious being. They could still lack any
internal life.

In the twentieth century the American philosopher Richard
Rorty (1931–2007) carried on this style of pragmatic thinking.
Like James, he thought of words as tools that we do things with,
rather than symbols that somehow mirror the way the world is.
Words allow us to cope with the world, not copy it. He declared
that ‘truth is what your contemporaries let you get away with’
and that no period of history gets reality more nearly right than
any other. When people describe the world, Rorty believed, they
are like literary critics giving an interpretation of a Shakespeare
play: there’s no single ‘correct’ way of reading it that we should
all agree on. Different people at different times interpret the text
differently. Rorty simply rejected the idea that any one view is
correct for all time. Or at least that’s my interpretation of his
work. Rorty presumably believed that there was no correct
interpretation of it in the same way that there’s no ‘right’ answer
about whether the hunter was circling the squirrel as it scram-
bled round the tree.

Whether or not there is a correct interpretation of the writ-
ings of Friedrich Nietzsche is also an interesting question.