The Death of God
Friedrich Nietzsche

‘God is dead’. These are the most famous words that the German
philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) wrote. But how
could God die? God is supposed to be immortal. Immortal
beings don’t die. They live for ever. In a way, though, that’s the
point. That’s why God’s death sounds so odd: it’s meant to.
Nietzsche was deliberately playing on the idea that God couldn’t
die. He wasn’t literally saying that God had been alive at one
time and now wasn’t; rather that belief in God had stopped
being reasonable. In his book Joyful Wisdom (1882) Nietzsche
put the line ‘God is dead’ in the mouth of a character who holds
a lantern and looks everywhere for God, but can’t find him. The
villagers think he is crazy.

Nietzsche was a remarkable man. Appointed as a professor at
the University of Basel at the very young age of 24, he looked set
for a distinguished academic career. But this eccentric and
original thinker didn’t fit in or conform, and seemed to enjoy
making life hard for himself. He eventually left the university in
1879, partly because of ill health, and travelled in Italy, France
and Switzerland, writing books that hardly anyone read at the
time, but which are now famous as works of both philosophy
and literature. His psychological health declined and he spent
much of his later life in an asylum.

In complete contrast to Immanuel Kant’s orderly presenta-
tion of ideas, Nietzsche’s come at you from all angles. Much of
the writing is in the form of short, fragmentary paragraphs and
pithy one-sentence comments, some of them ironic, some
sincere, many of them arrogant and provocative. Sometimes it
feels as if Nietzsche is shouting at you, sometimes that he is
whispering something profound in your ear. Often he wants the
reader to collude with him, as if he is saying that you and I know
how things are, but those foolish people over there are all
suffering from delusions. One theme he keeps returning to is
the future of morality.

If God is dead, what comes next? That’s the question Nietzsche
asked himself. His answer was that it left us without a basis for
morality. Our ideas of right and wrong and good and evil make
sense in a world where there is a God. They don’t in a godless
one. Take away God and you take away the possibility of clear
guidelines about how we should live, which things to value.
That’s a tough message, and not one most of his contemporaries
wanted to hear. He described himself as an ‘immoralist’, not
someone who deliberately does evil, but someone who believes
that we need to get beyond all morality: in the words of the title
of one of his books, ‘beyond good and evil’.

For Nietzsche, the death of God opened up new possibilities
for humanity. These were both terrifying and exhilarating. The
downside was that there was no safety net, no rules about how
people had to live or be. Where once religion had provided
meaning and a limit on moral action, the absence of God made
everything possible and removed all limits. The upside, at least
from Nietzsche’s perspective, was that individuals could now
create their own values for themselves. They could turn their
lives into the equivalent of works of art by developing their own
style of living.

Nietzsche saw that once you accept there is no God, you can’t
just cling to a Christian view of right and wrong. That would be
self-deception. The values that his culture had inherited, values
such as compassion, kindness, and consideration of other
people’s interests, could all be challenged. His way of doing this
was to speculate about where these values originally came from.

According to Nietzsche, the Christian virtues of looking after
the weak and helpless had surprising origins. You might think
that compassion and kindness are obviously good. You’ve prob-
ably been brought up to praise kindness and despise selfishness.
What Nietzsche claimed is that the patterns of thought and
feeling that we happen to possess have a history. Once you know
the history or ‘genealogy’ of how we come to have the concepts
that we do, it is hard to think of them as fixed for all time and
as somehow objective facts about how we ought to behave.

In his book The Genealogy of Morality he described the situ-
ation in Ancient Greece when powerful aristocratic heroes built
their lives around ideas of honour, shame and heroism in battle
rather than kindness, generosity and guilt at wrongdoing. This
is the world described by the Greek poet Homer in the Odyssey
and the Iliad. In this world of heroes, those who were powerless,
the slaves and the weak, were envious of the powerful. The
slaves channelled their envy and resentment towards the
powerful. Out of these negative feelings they created a new set
of values. They turned the heroic values of the aristocrats on
their head. Instead of celebrating strength and power like the
aristocrats, the slaves made generosity and care for the weak
into virtues. This slave morality, as Nietzsche calls it, treated
the acts of the powerful as evil and their own fellow feelings
as good.

The idea that a morality of kindness had its beginnings in
feelings of envy was a challenging one. Nietzsche showed a
strong preference for the values of the aristocrats, the celebra-
tion of strong warlike heroes, over the Christian morality of
compassion for the weak. Christianity and the morality derived
from it treats every individual as having the same worth;
Nietzsche thought that was a serious mistake. His artistic heroes
like Beethoven and Shakespeare were far superior to the herd.
The message seems to be that Christian values, which emerged
from envy in the first place, were holding humanity back. The
cost might be that the weak get trampled on, but that was a price
worth paying for the glory and achievement that this opened up
for the powerful.

In Thus Spake Zaruthustra (1883–92) he wrote about the
Übermensch or ‘Super-Man’. This describes an imagined person
of the future who is not held back by conventional moral codes,
but goes beyond them, creating new values. Perhaps influenced
by his understanding of Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution,
he saw the Übermensch as the next step in humanity’s develop-
ment. This is a bit worrying, partly because it seems to support
those who see themselves as heroic and want to have their way
without consideration of other people’s interests. Worse still, it
was an idea that the Nazis took from Nietzsche’s work and used
to support their warped views about a master race, though most
scholars argue that they distorted what Nietzsche actually
wrote.

Nietzsche was unfortunate in that his sister Elisabeth control-
led what happened to his work after he lost his sanity and for
thirty-five years after his death. She was a German nationalist of
the very worst kind and an anti-Semite. She went through her
brother’s notebooks, picking out the lines she agreed with and
leaving out anything that criticized Germany or didn’t support
her racist viewpoint. Her cut-and-paste version of Nietzsche’s
ideas, published as The Will to Power, turned his writing into
propaganda for Nazism, and Nietzsche became an approved
author in the Third Reich. It is highly unlikely that, had he lived
longer, he would have had anything to do with it. Yet it is undeni-
able that there are plenty of lines in his work that defend the right
of the strong to destroy the weak. It is no surprise, he tells us, that
lambs hate birds of prey. But that doesn’t mean we should despise
the birds of prey for carrying off and devouring the lambs.

Unlike Immanuel Kant, who celebrated reason, Nietzsche
always emphasized how emotions and irrational forces play
their part in shaping human values. His views almost certainly
influenced Sigmund Freud, whose work explored the nature
and power of unconscious desires.