Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

Thoughts in Disguise
Sigmund Freud

Can you really know yourself? The Ancient philosophers
believed that you could. But what if they were wrong? What if
there are parts of your mind that you can never reach directly,
like rooms that are permanently locked so that you can never
enter them?

Appearances can be deceptive. When you watch the sun in
the early morning it seems to come up from beyond the
horizon. During the day it moves across the sky and then finally
sets. It is tempting to think that it travels around the earth. For
many centuries people were convinced it did. But it doesn’t. In
the sixteenth century the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus real-
ized this, though other astronomers had their suspicions before
that. The Copernican revolution, the idea that our planet was
not at the heart of the solar system, came as a shock.

The mid-nineteenth century brought another surprise, as
we have seen (Chapter 25). Until then it had seemed likely
that human beings were completely different from animals
and had been designed by God. But Charles Darwin’s theory
of evolution by natural selection showed that human beings
share common ancestors with apes and that there was no
need to suppose that God had designed us. An impersonal
process was responsible. Darwin’s theory explained how we
had descended from ape-like creatures and how close we were
to them. The effects of the Darwinian revolution are still
being felt.

According to Sigmund Freud (1856–1939), the third great
revolution in human thought was brought about by his
own discovery: the unconscious. He realized that much of
what we do is driven by wishes that are hidden from us. We
can’t get at them directly. But that doesn’t stop them affecting
what we do. There are things that we want to do that we don’t
realize we want to do. These unconscious desires have a deep
influence on all our lives and on the way we organize society.
They are the source of the best and worst aspects of human
civilization. Freud was responsible for this discovery, though a
similar idea can be found in some of Friedrich Nietzsche’s
writing.

Freud, a psychiatrist who had begun his career as a neurolo-
gist, lived in Vienna when Austria was still part of the Austro-
Hungarian Empire. The son of a middle-class Jewish father, he
was typical of many well-educated and established young men
in this cosmopolitan city at the end of the nineteenth century.
His work with several young patients, however, drew his atten-
tion increasingly to the parts of the psyche that he believed were
governing their behaviour, creating their problems through
mechanisms of which they were unaware. He was fascinated
by hysteria and other types of neurosis. These hysterical
patients, who were mostly women, often walked in their sleep,
hallucinated, and even developed paralysis. Yet it wasn’t known
what was causing all this. Doctors couldn’t find a physical cause
for these symptoms. Through careful attention to the patients’
descriptions of their problems and knowledge of their personal
histories, Freud came up with the idea that the real source of
these people’s problems was some kind of disturbing memory
or desire. This memory or desire was unconscious and they had
no idea that they had it.

Freud would get his patients to lie on a couch and talk about
whatever came into their head, and often this made them feel
much better as it let their ideas escape. This ‘free association’,
allowing the ideas to flow, produced surprising results, making
what was previously unconscious conscious. He also asked
patients to recount their dreams. Somehow this ‘talking cure’
unlocked their troublesome thoughts and removed some of the
symptoms. It was as if the act of talking released pressure caused
by the ideas they did not want to confront. This was the birth of
psychoanalysis.

But it isn’t just neurotic and hysterical patients who have
unconscious wishes and memories. According to Freud, we all
do. That is how life in society is possible. We hide from ourselves
what we really feel and want to do. Some of these thoughts are
violent and many are sexual. They are too dangerous to let out.
The mind represses them, keeps them down in the unconscious.
Many are formed when we are small children. Very early events
in a child’s life can re-emerge in adulthood. For example, Freud
believed that men all have an unconscious wish to kill their
father and have sex with their mother. This is the famous
Oedipus complex, named after Oedipus who in Greek mythology
fulfilled the prophecy that he would murder his father and
marry his mother (without being aware in either case that he
was doing so). For some people, this early awkward desire
completely shapes their life without them even realizing it.
Something in the mind stops these darker thoughts getting
through in a recognizable form. But whatever it is in us that
stops this, and other unconscious desires, from becoming
conscious isn’t completely successful. The thoughts still manage
to escape, but in disguise. They emerge in dreams, for example.

For Freud, dreams were ‘the royal road to the unconscious’,
one of the best ways of finding out about hidden thoughts. The
things we see and experience in dreams aren’t what they seem.
There is the surface content, what appears to be going on. But
the latent content is the real meaning of the dream. That is what
the psychoanalyst tries to understand. The things we encounter
in dreams are symbols. They stand for the wishes that lurk in
our unconscious minds. So, for example, a dream that involves
a snake or an umbrella or a sword is usually a disguised sexual
dream. The snake, umbrella and sword are classic ‘Freudian
symbols’ – they stand for a penis. Similarly in a dream the image
of a purse or a cave represents a vagina. If you find this idea
shocking and absurd, Freud would probably tell you that that is
because your mind is protecting you from recognizing such
sexual thoughts within yourself.

Another way in which we get glimpses of unconscious wishes
is in slips of the tongue, so-called Freudian slips, where we acci-
dentally reveal wishes that we don’t realize we have. Many
television newsreaders have stumbled over a name or phrase,
accidentally speaking an obscenity. A Freudian would say this
happens too often for it simply to be a matter of chance.

Not all unconscious wishes are sexual or violent. Some reveal
a fundamental conflict. On a conscious level we may want one
thing that on an unconscious level we do not want. Imagine you
have an important examination that you have to pass in order
to go to university. Consciously you do everything in your
power to prepare for it. You go through the relevant past exami-
nation papers, prepare the answers to the questions in outline
form and make sure you set your alarm clock early
to get to the examination room on time. Everything seems to
be going well. You wake up on time, eat breakfast, catch the
bus, and realize you will arrive with time to spare. At this
point you doze off contentedly on the bus. But when you awake
you find, to your horror, that you have misread the number
on the bus and are now in completely the wrong part of town
with no chance of getting to the right part in time to sit the
examination. Your fear of the consequences of passing the
examination seem to have overruled your conscious efforts. At
a deep level you didn’t want to succeed. It would be too fright-
ening to admit this to yourself, but your unconscious revealed
it to you.

Freud applied his theory not just to individuals acting neurot-
ically, but also to common cultural beliefs. In particular he
gave a psychoanalytic account of why people are so drawn to
religion. You might believe in God. Perhaps you feel God’s
presence in your life. But Freud had an explanation for where
your belief in God comes from. You might think you believe
in God because God exists, but Freud thought that you believe
in God because you still feel the need for protection that you
felt as a very small child. In Freud’s view whole civilizations
have been based on this illusion – the illusion that there is a
strong father-figure out there somewhere who will meet your
unmet needs for protection. This is wishful thinking – believing
that such a God really exists because you have a great desire in
your heart that he should. It all stems from the unconscious
desire to be protected and cared for that arises in early child-
hood. The idea of God is comforting for adults who still have
these feelings left over from childhood, even though they don’t
usually realize where the feelings came from and actively
repress the idea that their religion comes entirely from a deeply
felt and unmet psychological need rather than from the exist-
ence of God.

From a philosophical point of view, Freud’s work brought
into question many assumptions that thinkers such as René
Descartes had made about the mind. Descartes believed that the
mind was transparent to itself. He believed that if you have a
thought you must be able to be aware of that thought. After
Freud the possibility of unconscious mental activity had to be
acknowledged.

But the basis of Freud’s ideas aren’t accepted by all philoso-
phers, though many accept that he was right about the possibility
of unconscious thought. Some have claimed that Freud’s theories
are unscientific. Most famously, Karl Popper (whose ideas are
more fully discussed in Chapter 36) described many of the ideas
of psychoanalysis as ‘unfalsifiable’. This wasn’t a compliment, but
a criticism. For Popper, the essence of scientific research was that
it could be tested; that is, there could be some possible observa-
tion that would show that it was false. In Popper’s example, the
actions of a man who pushed a child into a river, and a man who
dived in to save a drowning child were, like all human behaviour,
equally open to Freudian explanation. Whether someone tried to
drown or save a child, Freud’s theory could explain it. He would
probably say that the first man was repressing some aspect of his
Oedipal conflict, and that led to his violent behaviour, whereas
the second man had ‘sublimated’ his unconscious desires, that is,
managed to steer them into socially useful actions. If every
possible observation is taken as further evidence that the theory
is true, whatever that observation is, and no imaginable evidence
could show that it was false, Popper believed, the theory couldn’t
be scientific at all. Freud, on the other hand, might have argued
that Popper had some kind of repressed desire that made him so
aggressive towards psychoanalysis.

Bertrand Russell, a very different style of thinker from Freud,
shared his distaste for religion, believing that it was a major
source of human unhappiness.