Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

Boo!/Hooray!
Alfred Jules Ayer

Wouldn’t it be wonderful if you had a way of knowing when
someone was talking nonsense? You’d never need to be fooled
again. You could divide everything that you heard or read into
statements which made sense and statements which were just
nonsense and not worth your time. A.J. Ayer (1910–89) believed
he’d discovered one. He called it the Verification Principle.

After spending some months in Austria in the early 1930s
attending meetings of a group of brilliant scientists and philoso-
phers known as the Vienna Circle, Ayer returned to Oxford
where he was working as a lecturer. At the young age of 24 he
wrote a book that declared that most of the history of philos-
ophy was filled with gibberish – it was complete nonsense and
more or less worthless. That book, published in 1936, was called
Language, Truth and Logic. It was part of a movement known as
logical positivism, a movement that celebrated science as the
greatest human achievement.

‘Metaphysics’ is a word used to describe the study of any
reality that lies beyond our senses, the kind of thing that Kant,
Schopenhauer and Hegel believed in. For Ayer, though, ‘meta-
physics’ was a dirty word. It was what he was against. Ayer was
only interested in what could be known through logic or the
senses. But metaphysics often went far beyond either and
described realities which couldn’t be investigated scientifically
or conceptually. As far as Ayer was concerned, that meant it was
of no use at all and should be ditched.

Not surprisingly, Language, Truth and Logic ruffled feathers.
Many of the older philosophers in Oxford hated it, which made
it difficult for Ayer to get a job. But ruffling feathers is some-
thing philosophers have been doing for thousands of years, in
the tradition that began with Socrates. Still, to write a book that
so openly attacked the work of some of the great philosophers
of the past was a brave thing to do.

Ayer’s way of telling meaningful from meaningless sentences
was this. Take any sentence, and ask these two questions:

(1) Is it true by definition?
(2) Is it empirically verifiable?

If it was neither of these then it was meaningless. That was his
two-pronged test for meaningfulness. Only statements that
were true by definition or empirically verifiable were of any use
to philosophers. This needs some explanation. Examples of
statements that are true by definition are ‘All ostriches are birds’
or ‘All brothers are male’. These are analytic statements, in
Immanuel Kant’s terminology (see Chapter 19). You don’t need
to go and investigate ostriches to know they are birds – that’s
part of the definition of an ostrich. And obviously you couldn’t
have a female brother – no one will ever discover one of those,
you can be sure of that; not without a sex change at some point
anyway. Statements that are true by definition bring out what is
implicit in the terms that we use.

Empirically verifiable statements (‘synthetic’ statements, in
Kant’s jargon), in contrast, can give us genuine knowledge. For
a statement to be empirically verifiable there has to be some test
or observation that will show whether it is true or false. For
example if someone says ‘All dolphins eat fish’ we could get
some dolphins and offer them fish and see if they eat some. If
we discovered a dolphin that never ate fish, then we’d know that
the statement was false. That would still be a verifiable state-
ment for Ayer because he used the word ‘verifiable’ to cover
both ‘verifiable’ and ‘falsifiable’. Empirically verifiable state-
ments were all factual statements: they are about the way the
world is. There must be some observation that will support or
undermine them. Science is our best way of examining them.

If the sentence was neither true by definition nor empirically
verifiable (or falsifiable), then it was, Ayer declared, meaning-
less. As simple as that. This bit of Ayer’s philosophy was
borrowed straight from David Hume’s work. Hume had half
seriously suggested that we should burn works of philosophy
that failed this test because they contained nothing but ‘soph-
istry and illusion’. Ayer reworked Hume’s ideas for the twentieth
century.

So, if we take the sentence ‘Some philosophers have beards’
then it is fairly obvious that this isn’t true by definition, since it
isn’t part of the definition of a philosopher that some of them
must have facial hair. But it is empirically verifiable because it is
something we could go out and get evidence about. All we need
to do is look at a range of philosophers. If we find some with
beards, as we are very likely to do, then we can conclude that the
sentence is true. Or, if after looking at many hundreds of
philosophers we can’t find a single one with a beard, we may
conclude that the sentence ‘Some philosophers have beards’ is
probably false, though we can’t be sure without examining every
philosopher there is. Either way – true or false – the sentence is
meaningful.

Compare that with the sentence ‘My room is full of invisible
angels that leave no trace.’ That isn’t true by definition either.
But is it empirically verifiable? It seems not. There’s no imagi-
nable way of detecting these invisible angels if they really leave
no trace. You can’t touch them or smell them. They don’t leave
footprints, and they don’t make a noise. So the sentence is just
nonsense, even though it looks as if it might make sense. It is a
grammatically correct sentence, but as a statement about the
world, it is neither true nor false. It is meaningless.

This can be quite hard to grasp. The sentence ‘My room is full
of invisible angels that leave no trace’ seems to mean something.
But Ayer’s point is that it contributes nothing whatsoever to
human knowledge, though it might sound poetic or could
possibly contribute to a work of fiction.

Ayer didn’t just attack metaphysics: ethics and religion were
both targets for him too. For example, one of his most chal-
lenging conclusions was that moral judgements were literally
nonsense. This seemed an outrageous thing to say. But it was
what followed if you used his two-pronged test on moral state-
ments. If you say ‘Torture is wrong’ all you are doing, he
thought, was the equivalent of saying ‘Torture, boo!’ You are
revealing your personal emotions about the issue rather than
making a statement that could be true or false. That’s because
‘Torture is wrong’ isn’t true by definition. Nor is it something
that we could ever prove or disprove as a fact. There’s no test
that you could do that would decide the issue, he believed –
something that utilitarians such as Jeremy Bentham and John
Stuart Mill would have disputed, since they would have meas-
ured the resulting happiness.

It is therefore, on Ayer’s analysis, completely meaningless to
say ‘Torture is wrong’ since it is the type of sentence that could
never be either true or false. When you say ‘Compassion is
good’ all you are doing is showing how you feel: it’s just like
saying ‘Compassion, Hooray!’ Not surprisingly, Ayer’s theory of
ethics, known as emotivism, is often described as the Boo!/
Hooray! Theory. Some people took Ayer to be saying that
morality doesn’t matter, that you can choose to do whatever you
like. But that wasn’t his point. He meant that we couldn’t have
meaningful discussion of these issues in terms of values, but he
did believe that in most debates about what we should do facts
were discussed, and these were empirically verifiable.

In another chapter of Language, Truth and Logic Ayer attacked
the idea that we could talk meaningfully about God. He argued
that the statement ‘God exists’ was neither true nor false; again,
it was, he felt, literally meaningless. That’s because it wasn’t true
by definition (though some people, following St Anselm, using
the Ontological Argument have said God must necessarily
exist). And there wasn’t a test you could do to prove God’s exist-
ence or non-existence – since he rejected the Design Argument.
So Ayer was neither a theist (who believes God exists) nor an
atheist (who believes that God doesn’t exist). Rather he thought
that ‘God exists’ was just another of those meaningless state-
ments – some people give this position the name ‘igtheism’.
So Ayer was an igtheist, that special category of people who
think that all talk of God existing or not existing is complete
nonsense.

Despite this, Ayer did get a shock very late in life when he had
a near-death experience after choking on a bit of salmon bone
and falling unconscious. His heart stopped for four minutes.
During that time he had a clear vision of a red light and two
‘Masters of the Universe’ talking to each other. This vision didn’t
make him believe in God, far from it, but it did make him ques-
tion his certainty about whether the mind could continue
existing after death.

Unfortunately for Ayer’s logical positivism, it provided the
tools for its own destruction. The theory itself didn’t seem to
pass its own test. First, it’s not obvious that the theory is true by
definition. Secondly, there is no observation that would prove
or disprove it. So by its own standards it is meaningless.

For those who turned to philosophy to help them answer
questions about how to live, Ayer’s philosophy was of very little
use. More promising in many ways was existentialism, the
movement that emerged from Europe during and immediately
after the Second World War.