The Anguish of Freedom
Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and Albert Camus

If you could travel back in time to 1945 and to a café in Paris
called Les Deux Magots (‘The Two Wise Men’), you would find
yourself sitting near a small man with goggly eyes. He is
smoking a pipe and writing in a notebook. This man is Jean-
Paul Sartre (1905–80), the most famous existentialist philoso-
pher. He was also a novelist, playwright and biographer. He
lived most of his life in hotels and did most of his writing in
cafés. He didn’t look like a cult figure, but within a few years
that’s what he would become.

Quite often Sartre would be joined by a beautiful and highly
intelligent woman, Simone de Beauvoir (1908–86). They’d
known each other since they met at college. She was his long-
term companion, though they never married and never lived
together. They had other lovers too, but theirs was a long-lasting
relationship – they described it as ‘essential’ and all their other
relationships as ‘contingent’ (meaning ‘not necessary’). Like
Sartre, she was a philosopher and a novelist. She wrote an
important early feminist book called The Second Sex (1949).

During much of the Second World War that had just ended
Paris had been occupied by the Nazi forces. Life had been very
difficult for the French. Some had managed to join the Resistance
fighters and had fought the Germans. Others had collaborated
with the Nazis and betrayed their friends to save themselves.
Food had been in short supply. There had been gun battles in
the streets. People disappeared and were never seen again. The
Jews of Paris had been sent to concentration camps, where most
were murdered.

Now that the Allies had defeated Germany it was time to start
life afresh. There was both relief that the war was over and also
a sense that the past had to be left behind. It was time to think
through what sort of society there should be. After the terrible
things that had happened in the war, all kinds of people were
asking themselves the sorts of questions philosophers ask, like
‘What is the point of living?’, ‘Is there a God?’, ‘Must I always do
what others expect me to do?’

Sartre had already written a long and difficult book called
Being and Nothingness (1943) which was published during the
war. The central theme of the book was freedom. Human beings
are free. This was an odd message in occupied France when
most French people felt like – or really were – prisoners in their
own country. What he meant, though, was that, unlike, say, a
penknife, a human being wasn’t designed to do anything in
particular. Sartre didn’t believe there was a God who could have
designed us, so he rejected the idea that God had a purpose for
us. The penknife was designed to cut. That was its essence, what
made it what it is. But what was a human being designed to do?
Human beings don’t have an essence. We aren’t here for a
reason, he thought. There is no particular way we have to be to
be human. A human being can choose what to do, what to
become. We are all free. No one but you can decide what you
make of your life. If you let other people decide how you live,
that is, again, a choice. It would be a choice to be the kind of
person other people expect you to be.

Obviously if you make a choice to do something, you might
not always succeed in doing it. And the reasons why you don’t
succeed may be completely outside your control. But you are
responsible for wanting to do that thing, for trying to do it, and
for how you respond to your failure to be able to do it.

Freedom is hard to handle and many of us run away from it.
One of the ways to hide is to pretend that you aren’t really free
at all. If Sartre is right, we can’t make excuses: we are completely
responsible for what we do every day and how we feel about
what we do. Right down to the emotions we have. If you’re sad
right now, that’s your choice, according to Sartre. You don’t have
to be sad. If you are sad, you are responsible for it. That is fright-
ening and some people would rather not face up to it because it
is so painful. He talks about us being ‘condemned to be free’.
We’re stuck with this freedom whether we like it or not.

Sartre described a waiter in a café. This café waiter moves in
a very stylized way, acting as if he is a kind of puppet. Everything
about him suggests that he thinks of himself as completely
defined by his role as a waiter, as if he has no choice about
anything. The way he holds the tray, the way he moves between
the tables, are all part of a kind of dance – a dance that is chore-
ographed by his job as a waiter, not by the human being
performing it. Sartre says this man is in ‘bad faith’. Bad faith is
running away from freedom. It is a kind of lie you tell yourself
and almost believe: the lie that you aren’t really free to choose
what to do with your life, when, according to Sartre, whether
you like it or not, you are.

In a lecture he gave just after the war, ‘Existentialism is a
Humanism’, Sartre described human life as full of anguish. The
anguish comes from understanding that we can’t make any
excuses but are responsible for everything we do. But the
anguish is worse because, according to Sartre, whatever I do
with my life is a kind of template for what anyone else should do
with their life. If I decide to marry, I’m suggesting that everyone
should marry; if I decide to be lazy, that’s what everyone should
do in my vision of human existence. Through the choices
I make in my life I paint a picture of what I think a human
being ought to be like. If I do this sincerely it is a great
responsibility.

Sartre explained what he meant by the anguish of choice
through the true story of a student who had come to ask his
advice during the war. This young man had to make a very
difficult decision. He could either stay at home to look after his
mother; or he could run off and try to join the French Resistance
and fight to save his country from the Germans. This was the
most difficult decision of his life and he wasn’t sure what to do.
If he left his mother, she would be vulnerable without him. He
might not succeed in getting to the Resistance fighters before
being caught by the Germans, and then the whole attempt to do
something noble would be a waste of energy and of a life. But if
he stayed at home with his mother, he’d be letting others do the
fighting for him. What should he do? What would you do?
What advice would you give him?

Sartre’s advice was a bit frustrating. He told the student that
he was free and that he should choose for himself. If Sartre had
given the student any practical advice about what to do, the
student would still have had to decide whether or not to follow
it. There is no way to escape the weight of responsibility that
comes with being human.

‘Existentialism’ was the name that other people gave to
Sartre’s philosophy. The name came from the idea that we find
ourselves first of all existing in the world, and then have to
decide what we will make of our lives. It could have been the
other way round: we could have been like a penknife, designed
for a particular purpose. But, Sartre believed, we aren’t. In his
way of putting it, our existence comes before our essence,
whereas for designed objects their essence comes before their
existence.

In The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir gave this existen-
tialism a different twist by claiming that women are not born
women; they become women. What she meant was that women
tend to accept men’s view of what a woman is. To be what men
expect you to be is a choice. But women, being free, can decide
for themselves what they want to be. They have no essence, no
way given by nature that they have to be.

Another important theme of existentialism was the absurdity
of our existence. Life doesn’t have any meaning at all until we
give it meaning by making choices, and then before too long
death comes and removes all the meaning that we can give it.
Sartre’s version of this was to describe a human being as ‘a
useless passion’: there is no point to our existence at all. There
is only the meaning each of us creates through our choices.
Albert Camus (1913–60), a novelist and philosopher also linked
with existentialism, used the Greek myth of Sisyphus to explain
human absurdity. Sisyphus’ punishment for tricking the gods is
that he has to roll a huge rock to the top of a mountain. When
he reaches the top, the rock rolls down and he has to begin from
the bottom once more. Sisyphus has to do this again and again
for ever. Human life is like Sisyphus’ task in that it is completely
meaningless. There is no point to it: no answers that will explain
everything. It’s absurd. But Camus didn’t think we should
despair. We shouldn’t commit suicide. Instead we have to recog-
nize that Sisyphus is happy. Why is he happy? Because there is
something about the pointless struggle of rolling that huge rock
up the mountain that makes his life worth living. It is still pref-
erable to death.

Existentialism became a cult. Thousands of young people
were drawn to it and would discuss the absurdity of human
existence late into the night. It inspired novels, plays and films.
It was a philosophy that people could live by and apply to their
own decisions. Sartre himself became more politically involved
and more left wing as he got older, and he tried to combine the
insights of Marxism with his earlier ideas – a difficult task. His
existentialism of the 1940s focused on individuals making
choices for themselves; but in his later work he tried to make
sense of how we are part of a larger group of people and how
social and economic factors play a role in our lives. Unfortunately
his writing got more and more difficult to understand, perhaps
in part because much of it was written while he was high on
amphetamines.

Sartre was probably the best-known philosopher of the twen-
tieth century. But if you ask philosophers who was the most
important thinker of the last century, many of them will tell you
that it was Ludwig Wittgenstein.