The Man Who Didn’t Ask Questions
Hannah Arendt

The Nazi Adolf Eichmann was a hard-working administrator.
From 1942 he was in charge of transporting the Jews of Europe
to concentration camps in Poland, including Auschwitz. This
was part of Adolf Hitler’s ‘Final Solution’: his plan to kill all Jews
living in land occupied by the German forces. Eichmann wasn’t
responsible for the policy of systematic killing – it was not his
idea. But he was heavily involved in organizing the railway
system that made it possible.

Since the 1930s the Nazis had been introducing laws that
took away the rights of Jewish people. Hitler blamed almost
everything that was wrong with Germany on the Jews and had
a mad wish to get revenge on them. These laws prevented Jews
from going to state-run schools, forced them to hand over
money and property, and made them wear a yellow star. Jews
were rounded up and forced to live in ghettos – overcrowded
sections of cities that became prisons for them. Food was scarce,
and life was difficult. But the Final Solution introduced a new
level of evil. Hitler’s decision to murder millions of people
simply because of their race meant that the Nazis needed a way
of getting the Jews out of the cities to places where they could
be killed in large numbers. Existing concentration camps were
turned into factories for gassing and cremating hundreds of
people a day. As many of these camps were in Poland, someone
had to organize the trains that transported the Jews to their
deaths.

While Eichmann sat shuffling bits of paper in an office and
making important telephone calls, millions died as a result of
what he did. Some perished from typhoid or starvation, others
were made to work until they died, but most were killed with
gas. In Nazi Germany the trains ran on time – Eichmann and
people like him made sure of that. Their efficiency kept the
cattle trucks full. Inside were men, women and children, all on
a long and painful journey to their death, usually without food
or water, sometimes in intense heat or cold. Many died on the
journey, particularly the old and sick.

The survivors arrived weak and terrified, only to be forced
into chambers disguised as shower rooms where they were
made to strip naked. The doors were locked. It was here that the
Nazis murdered them with Zyklon gas. Their bodies were
burned and their possessions plundered. If they weren’t selected
for immediate death in this way, the stronger ones among them
might be forced to work in atrocious conditions with little food.
The Nazi guards would beat or even shoot them for fun.

Eichmann played a significant role in these crimes. Yet after
the Second World War ended he managed to escape from
the Allies, eventually arriving in Argentina, where he lived for
some years in secret. In 1960, though, members of the Israeli
secret police, Mossad, tracked him down to Buenos Aires and
captured him. They drugged him and flew him back to Israel to
stand trial.

Was Eichmann some kind of evil beast, a sadist who enjoyed
other people’s suffering? That was what most people believed
before the trial began. How else could he have played this part
in the Holocaust? For several years his job was to find efficient
ways to send people to their death. Surely only a monster would
be capable of sleeping at night after that kind of work.
The philosopher Hannah Arendt (1906–75), a German Jew
who had emigrated to the United States, reported on Eichmann’s
trial for the New Yorker magazine. She was interested in coming
face to face with a product of the Nazi totalitarian state, a
society in which there was little room to think for yourself. She
wanted to understand this man, get a sense of what he was like;
and see how he could have done such terrible things.

Eichmann was very far from the first Nazi that Arendt had
met. She fled the Nazis herself, leaving Germany for France, but
eventually becoming a US citizen. As a young woman at the
University of Marburg her teacher had been the philosopher
Martin Heidegger. For a short while they were lovers even
though she was only 18 and he was married. Heidegger was
busy writing Being and Time (1962), an incredibly difficult
book that some people think is a major contribution to philos-
ophy and others a deliberately obscure piece of writing. Later
he would become a committed member of the Nazi Party,
supporting its anti-Jewish policies. He even removed the
name of his former friend, the philosopher Edmund Husserl,
from the dedication page of Being and Time because he was
Jewish.

But now in Jerusalem, Arendt was to meet a very different
sort of Nazi. Here was a rather ordinary man who chose not to
think too hard about what he was doing. His failure to think had
disastrous consequences. But he wasn’t the evil sadist that she
might have expected to find. He was something far more
common but equally dangerous: an unthinking man. In a
Germany where the worst forms of racism had been written
into the law, it was easy for him to persuade himself that what
he was doing was right. Circumstances gave him the opportu-
nity for a successful career, and he took it. Hitler’s Final Solution
was an opportunity for Eichmann to do well, to show that he
could do a good job. This is difficult to imagine, and many
critics of Arendt don’t think she was right, but she felt that he
was sincere when he claimed to be doing his duty.

Unlike some Nazis, Eichmann didn’t seem to be driven by a
strong hatred of Jews. He had none of Hitler’s venom. There
were plenty of Nazis who would have happily beaten a Jew to
death in the street for failing to give the ‘Heil Hitler!’ greeting,
but he wasn’t one of them. Yet he had taken on the official Nazi
line and had accepted it, but far, far worse than that, he had
helped send millions to their death. Even as he listened to the
evidence against him he seemed to see little wrong with what he
had done. As far as he was concerned, since he had not broken
any laws, and had never directly killed anyone himself or asked
anyone else to do that for him, he had behaved reasonably. He
had been brought up to obey the law and trained to follow
orders, and all around him people were doing the same as he
was. By taking commands from other people he avoided feeling
responsible for the results of his daily work.

There was no need for Eichmann to see people bundled into
cattle trucks or to visit the death camps, so he didn’t. This was a
man who told the court he couldn’t have become a doctor
because he was afraid of the sight of blood. Yet the blood was
still on his hands. He was a product of a system that had
somehow prevented him thinking critically about his own
actions and the results they produced for real people. It was as
if he couldn’t imagine other people’s feelings at all. He carried
on with his deluded belief in his innocence all through his trial.
Either that, or he had decided that his best line of defence was
to say he was only obeying the law; if so, he took Arendt in.

Arendt used the words ‘the banality of evil’ to describe what
she saw in Eichmann. If something is ‘banal’, it is common,
boring and unoriginal. Eichmann’s evil was, she claimed, banal
in the sense that it was the evil of a bureaucrat, of an office
manager, rather than a devil. Here was this very ordinary
sort of man who had allowed Nazi views to affect everything
he did.

Arendt’s philosophy was inspired by events around her. She
wasn’t the kind of philosopher to spend her life in an armchair
thinking about purely abstract ideas or debating endlessly about
the precise meaning of a word. Her philosophy was linked to
recent history and lived experience. What she wrote in her book
Eichmann in Jerusalem was based on her observations of one
man and the sorts of language and justifications he gave. From
what she saw she developed more general explanations of evil in
a totalitarian state and its effects on those who did not resist its
thought patterns.

Eichmann, like many Nazis during that era, failed to see
things from someone else’s perspective. He wasn’t brave enough
to question the rules that he was given: he simply looked for the
best way to follow them. He lacked imagination. Arendt
described him as shallow and brainless – though that too could
have been an act. Had he been a monster he would have been
terrifying. But at least monsters are rare and usually quite easy
to spot. What was perhaps more terrifying still was the fact that
he appeared so normal. He was an ordinary man who, by failing
to question what he was doing, took part in some of the most
evil acts known to humanity. If he had not lived in Nazi
Germany it is unlikely that he would have been an evil man.
Circumstances were against him. But that doesn’t remove his
guilt. He was obedient to immoral orders. And obeying Nazi
orders was, as far as Arendt was concerned, the same as
supporting the Final Solution. By failing to question what he
was told to do, and by carrying out those orders, he took part in
mass murder even though from his point of view he was just
creating train timetables. At one point in his trial he even
claimed to be acting according to Immanuel Kant’s theory of
moral duty – as if he had done the right thing by following
orders. He completely failed to understand that Kant believed
that treating human beings with respect and dignity was funda-
mental to morality.

Karl Popper was a Viennese intellectual fortunate enough to
escape the Holocaust and Eichmann’s well-timetabled trains.