Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

Learning from Mistakes
Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn

In 1666 a young scientist was sitting in a garden when an apple
fell to the ground. This made him wonder why apples fall
straight down, rather than going off to the side or upwards. The
scientist was Isaac Newton, and the incident inspired him to
come up with his theory of gravity, a theory that explained the
movements of planets as well as apples. But what happened
next? Do you think that Newton then gathered evidence that
proved beyond all doubt that his theory was true? Not according
to Karl Popper (1902–94).

Scientists, like all of us, learn from their mistakes. Science
progresses when we realize that a particular way of thinking
about reality is false. That, in two sentences, was Karl Popper’s
view of how humanity’s best hope for knowledge about the
world functions. Before he developed his ideas most people
believed that scientists begin with a hunch about how the world
is, and then gather evidence that shows their hunch was correct.

What scientists do, according to Popper, is try to prove their
theories are false. Testing a theory involves seeing if it can be
refuted (shown to be false). A typical scientist starts with a bold
guess or conjecture that he or she then tries to undermine in a
series of experiments or observations. Science is a creative and
exciting enterprise, but it doesn’t prove anything is true – all it
does is get rid of false views and – hopefully – edge towards
truth in the process.

Popper was born in Vienna in 1902. Although his family had
converted to Christianity, he was descended from Jews and
when Hitler came to power in the 1930s Popper wisely left the
country, moving first to New Zealand, and later to England
where he settled, and took up a post at the London School
of Economics. As a young man he had wide-ranging interests
in science, psychology, politics and music, but philosophy was
his real love. By the end of his life he had made important
contributions both to the philosophy of science and to political
philosophy.

Until Popper started writing about scientific method, many
scientists and philosophers believed that the way to do science
was to seek out evidence that supported your hypothesis. If you
wanted to prove that all swans are white you’d make a lot of
observations of white swans. If all the swans you looked at were
white, it seemed reasonable to assume that your hypothesis ‘All
swans are white’ was true. This style of reasoning goes from ‘All
the swans I’ve seen are white’ to the conclusion ‘All swans are
white.’ But clearly a swan that you haven’t observed could turn
out to be black. There are black swans in Australia, for example,
and in many zoos around the world. So the statement ‘All swans
are white’ doesn’t follow logically from the evidence. Even if you
have looked at thousands of swans and they were all white, it
could still be false. The only way to prove conclusively that they
are all white is to look at every single swan. If just one black
swan exists, your conclusion ‘All swans are white’ will have been
falsified.

This is a version of the Problem of Induction, a problem that
David Hume wrote about in the eighteenth century. Induction
is very different from deduction. That is the source of the
problem. Deduction is a type of logical argument where if the
premises (the starting assumptions) are true the conclusion
must be true. So, to take a famous example, ‘All men are mortal’
and ‘Socrates is a man’ are two premises from which the logical
conclusion ‘Socrates is mortal’ follows. You would contradict
yourself if you agreed that ‘All men are mortal’ and that ‘Socrates
is a man’, but denied the truth of the statement ‘Socrates is
mortal.’ That would be like saying ‘Socrates both is and is not
mortal.’ One way of thinking about this is that with deduction
the truth of the conclusion is somehow contained within the
premises and logic just teases it out. Here’s another example of
deduction:

Premise one: All fish have gills.
Premise two: John is a fish.
Conclusion: Therefore John has gills.

It would be absurd to say that premise one and premise two
were true, but that the conclusion was false. That would be
completely illogical.

Induction is very different from this. Induction usually
involves arguing from a selection of observations to a general
conclusion. If you notice that it rained every Tuesday for four
consecutive weeks, you might generalize from this that it always
rains on Tuesdays. That would be a case of Induction. It would
only take one dry Tuesday to undermine the claim that it always
rains on Tuesdays. Four consecutive wet Tuesdays is a small
sample of all the possible Tuesdays. But even if you make
numerous observations, as with the white swans, you can still be
thwarted by the existence of a single case that doesn’t fit your
generalization: one dry Tuesday or one non-white swan, for
example. And that is the Problem of Induction, the problem of
justifying relying on the method of induction when it seems so
unreliable. How do you know that the next glass of water you
drink won’t poison you? Answer: all the glasses of water you’ve
drunk in the past were fine. So you assume that this one will be.
We use this kind of reasoning all the time. Yet it seems that we
aren’t completely justified in putting such faith in it. We assume
patterns in nature that may or may not really be there.

If you think that science progresses by induction, as many
philosophers have done, then you have to face the Problem of
Induction. How can science be based on such an unreliable style
of reasoning? Popper’s view of how science develops neatly
avoids this problem. That’s because, according to him, science
doesn’t rely on induction. Scientists start with a hypothesis, an
informed guess about the nature of reality. An example might
be ‘All gases expand when heated.’ This is a simple hypothesis,
but real-life science involves a great deal of creativity and imagi-
nation at this stage. Scientists find their ideas in many places:
the chemist August Kekulé, for example, famously dreamt of a
snake biting its own tail, which gave him the idea for the
hypothesis that the structure of the benzene molecule is a
hexagonal ring – a hypothesis that has so far stood up to scien-
tists’ attempts to prove it false.

Scientists then find a way of testing this hypothesis – in this
case, getting a lot of different sorts of gas and heating them. But
‘testing’ doesn’t mean finding evidence to support the hypoth-
esis; it means trying to prove that the hypothesis can survive
attempts to falsify it. Ideally the scientists will look for a gas that
doesn’t fit the hypothesis. Remember that in the case of the
swans it only took one black swan to undermine the generaliza-
tion that all swans are white. Similarly, it would only take one
gas that failed to expand when heated to undermine the
hypothesis that ‘All gases expand when heated.’

If a scientist refutes a hypothesis – that is, shows that it is
false – then that results in a new bit of knowledge: the knowl-
edge that the hypothesis is false. Humanity progresses because
we learn something. Observing lots of gases which do expand
when heated won’t give us knowledge, except perhaps a little
more confidence in our hypothesis. But a counter-example
really teaches us something. For Popper a key feature of any
hypothesis is that it has to be falsifiable. He used this idea to
explain the difference between science and what he called
‘pseudo-science’. A scientific hypothesis is one that can be
proved wrong: it makes predictions that can be shown to be
false. If I say ‘There are invisible, undetectable fairies making
me type this sentence’, then there is no observation that you can
make that will prove my statement is false. If the fairies are
invisible and don’t leave any trace, there is no way of showing
that the claim that they exist is false. It is unfalsifiable and so not
a scientific statement at all.

Popper thought that many statements made about psycho-
analysis (see Chapter 30) were unfalsifiable in this way. He
thought they were untestable. For example, if someone says that
everyone is motivated by unconscious wishes, there is no test
to prove this. Every bit of evidence, including people denying
that they are motivated by unconscious wishes, is, according to
Popper, merely taken as further proof that psychoanalysis is
valid. The psychoanalyst will say, ‘The fact that you deny the
unconscious demonstrates that you have a strong unconscious
wish to challenge your father.’ But this statement can’t be tested
because there is no imaginable evidence that could show that it
was false. Consequently, Popper argued, psychoanalysis wasn’t
a science. It couldn’t give us knowledge in the way a science
could. Popper attacked Marxist accounts of history in the
same way, arguing that every possible outcome would count
as support for the view that the history of humanity is a history
of class struggle. So again, it was based on unfalsifiable
hypotheses.

In contrast, Albert Einstein’s theory that light would be
attracted by the sun was falsifiable. That made it a scientific
theory. In 1919 observations of the apparent position of stars
during an eclipse of the sun failed to refute it. But they might
have done. The light from the stars was not normally visible, but
under the rare conditions of an eclipse scientists were able to see
that the stars’ apparent positions were where Einstein’s theory
predicted they would be. If they had seemed to be somewhere
else, this would have undermined Einstein’s theory of how light
is attracted to very heavy bodies. Popper didn’t think these
observations proved that Einstein’s theory was true. But the
testability of the theory, and the fact that scientists had been
unable to show it to be false, counted in its favour. Einstein
made predictions which could have been wrong, but they
weren’t.

Many scientists and philosophers have been deeply impressed
by Popper’s description of scientific method. Peter Medawar,
who won the Nobel Prize for Medicine, for example, said, ‘I
think Karl Popper is incomparably the greatest philosopher of
science there has ever been.’ The scientists particularly liked the
description of their activity as creative and imaginative; they
also felt that Popper understood how they actually went about
their work. The philosophers were delighted with the way that
Popper got around the difficult issue of the Problem of Induction
too. In 1962, however, the American historian of science and
physicist Thomas Kuhn published a book called The Structure
of Scientific Revolutions, which told a different story of how
science progresses, one that suggested Popper had got things
wrong. Kuhn believed that Popper hadn’t looked closely enough
at the history of science. If he had he would have seen a pattern
emerging.

Most of the time what he called ‘normal science’ goes on.
Scientists work within a framework or ‘paradigm’ that the scien-
tists of that day share. So, for example, before people realized
that the earth revolves around the sun, the paradigm was that
the sun goes round the earth. Astronomers would do their
research within that framework and would have explanations of
any evidence that didn’t seem to fit with it. Working within this
paradigm, a scientist like Copernicus who came up with
the idea that the earth goes round the sun would be thought to
have made a mistake in his calculations. According to Kuhn,
there aren’t facts out there waiting to be discovered: instead, the
framework or paradigm to some extent fixes what you can
think about.

Things get interesting when what Kuhn called a ‘paradigm
shift’ happens. A paradigm shift is when a whole way of under-
standing is overturned. This can happen when scientists find
things that don’t fit in with the existing paradigm – such as
observations that didn’t make sense within the paradigm that
the sun goes round the earth. But even then it can take a long
time for people to abandon their old ways of thinking. Scientists
who have spent their lives working within one paradigm don’t
usually welcome a different way of looking at the world. When
they do eventually switch to a new paradigm, a period of
normal science can begin again, this time working within the
new framework. And so it goes on. That’s what happened when
the view that the earth was the centre of the universe was over-
turned. Once people started to think about the solar system in
that way, there was a lot more normal science to do to under-
stand the paths of the planets around the sun.

Popper, not surprisingly, didn’t agree with this account of the
history of science, although he did agree that the concept of
‘normal science’ was useful. Whether he was like a scientist with
an outdated paradigm himself, or had got closer to the truth
about reality than Kuhn had, is an intriguing question.

Scientists use real experiments; philosophers, on the other
hand, tend to invent thought experiments to make their argu-
ments plausible. The philosophers Philippa Foot and Judith
Jarvis Thomson have developed a number of carefully
constructed thought experiments that reveal important features
of our moral thinking.