Fairness through Ignorance
John Rawls

Perhaps you’re wealthy. Perhaps you’re super-rich. But most of
us aren’t, and some people are very poor, so poor that they
spend most of their short lives hungry and sick. This doesn’t
seem fair or right – and it surely isn’t. If there were true justice
in the world no children would starve while others have so
much money that they don’t know what to do with it. Everyone
who is sick would have access to good medical treatment. The
poor of Africa wouldn’t be so much worse off than the poor in
the USA and Britain. The rich of the West wouldn’t be so many
thousand times as rich as those who through no fault of their
own were born into disadvantage. Justice is about treating
people fairly. There are people around us whose lives are filled
with good things, and others who, through no fault of their
own, get few choices about how they survive: they can’t choose
the job they do, or even the town where they live. Some people
who think about these inequalities will just say, ‘Oh well, life’s
not fair’ and shrug their shoulders. These are usually the ones
who have been particularly lucky; others will spend time
thinking about how society could be better organized and
perhaps try to change it to make it fairer.

John Rawls (1921–2002), a modest, quiet Harvard academic,
wrote a book that changed the way people thought about these
things. That book was A Theory of Justice (1971) and the result
of nearly twenty years of hard thinking. It’s really a professor’s
book meant for other professors and written in a rather dry
academic style. Unlike most books of this kind, though, it didn’t
sit gathering dust in a library – far from it. It became a bestseller.
In some ways it’s amazing that so many people read it. But its
key ideas were so interesting that it was very quickly declared
one of the most influential books of the twentieth century, read
by philosophers, lawyers, politicians and many others – some-
thing Rawls himself had never dreamt was possible.

Rawls had fought in the Second World War, and was in the
Pacific on 6 August 1945 when the atom bomb was dropped on
the Japanese city of Hiroshima. He was deeply affected by his
wartime experiences and believed that it had been wrong to use
nuclear weapons. Like many who lived through that period, he
wanted to create a better world, a better society. But his way of
bringing about change was through thinking and writing,
rather than joining political causes and rallies. While he was
writing A Theory of Justice, the Vietnam war was raging, and
across the United States large-scale anti-war protests – not all of
them peaceful – were taking place. Rawls chose to write about
abstract general questions of justice rather than getting caught
up in the issues of the moment. At the heart of his work was the
idea that we need to think clearly about how we live together
and the ways in which the state influences our lives. For our
existence to be bearable we need to co-operate. But how?

Imagine you have to design a new and better society. One
question you might ask is, ‘Who gets what?’ If you live in a
beautiful mansion with an indoor swimming pool and servants,
and have a private jet waiting to whisk you away to a tropical
island, you might well conjure up a world in which some people
are very rich – perhaps the ones who work hardest – and others
much poorer. If you are living in poverty now, you’ll probably
design a society in which no one is allowed to be super-rich, one
where everyone gets a more equal share of what is available: no
private jets allowed, but better chances for people who are
unfortunate. Human nature is like that: people tend to think of
their own position when they describe a better world, whether
they realize it or not. These prejudices and biases distort polit-
ical thinking.

Rawls’ stroke of genius was to come up with a thought expe-
riment – he called it ‘The Original Position’ – that plays down
some of the selfish biases we all have. His central idea is very
simple: design a better society, but do it without knowing what
position in society you’ll occupy. You don’t know whether you’ll
be rich, poor, have a disability, be good looking, male, female,
ugly, intelligent or unintelligent, talented or unskilled, homo-
sexual, bisexual or heterosexual. He thinks you will choose
fairer principles behind this imaginary ‘veil of ignorance’
because you won’t know where you might end up, what kind of
a person you might be. From this simple device of choosing
without knowing your own place, Rawls developed his theory of
justice. This was based on two principles he thought all reason-
able people would accept, principles of freedom and equality.

The first principle was his Liberty Principle. This states that
everyone should have the right to a range of basic freedoms that
mustn’t be taken away from them, such as freedom of belief,
freedom to vote for their leaders, and extensive freedom of
expression. Even if restricting some of these freedoms improved
the lives of a majority of people, Rawls thought, they were so
important that the freedoms should be protected above all. Like
all liberals, Rawls put a very high value on these basic liberties,
believing that everyone had a right to them and that no one
should take them away.

Rawls’ second principle, the Difference Principle, is all about
equality. Society should be arranged to give more equal wealth
and opportunity to the most disadvantaged. If people receive
different amounts of money, then this inequality is only allowed
if it directly helps the worst off. A banker can only get 10,000
times more than the lowest-paid worker if the lowest-paid
worker benefits directly and receives an increased amount of
money that he or she wouldn’t have had if the banker was
paid less. If Rawls were in charge, no one would earn huge
bonuses unless the poorest got more money as a result. Rawls
thinks this is the kind of world reasonable people would choose
if they didn’t know whether they would be rich or poor
themselves.

Before Rawls, philosophers and politicians who thought
about who should get what often argued in favour of a situation
which would produce the highest average amount of wealth.
That could mean that some people could be super-rich, many
moderately rich and few very poor. But for Rawls, such a situa-
tion was worse than one in which there were no super-rich, but
everyone had a more equal share, even though the average
amount of wealth was lower.

This is a challenging idea – particularly to those who are
capable of earning high salaries in the world as it is. Robert Nozick
(1938–2002), another important American political philosopher,
further to the right politically than Rawls, questioned it. Surely
fans who come to watch a brilliant basketball player should be free
to give a small part of their ticket money to that player. It’s their
right to spend their money in this way. And if millions come to
watch him, then the sportsman will – fairly, Nozick thought – earn
millions of dollars. Rawls entirely disagreed with this view. Unless
the poorest got richer as a result of this deal, Rawls argued, then
the basketball player’s personal earnings shouldn’t be allowed to
increase to such high levels. Rawls, controversially, believed that
being a gifted athlete or a highly intelligent person did not
automatically entitle individuals to higher earnings. That was in
part because he believed that such things as sporting ability and
intelligence were a matter of good luck. You don’t deserve more
simply because you are fortunate enough to be a fast runner or a
great ball player, or if you are very bright. Being athletically
talented or intelligent is the result of winning in the ‘natural
lottery’. Many people disagree strongly with Rawls and feel that
excellence should be rewarded. But Rawls thought that there was
no automatic connection between being good at something and
deserving more.

But what if from behind the veil of ignorance some people
would prefer to take a gamble? What if they thought of life as a
lottery and wanted to make sure that there were some very
attractive positions to occupy in society? Presumably gamblers
might take the risk of ending up poor if they had a chance to be
extremely rich. So they’d prefer a world with a wider range of
economic possibilities than the one Rawls described. Rawls
believed that reasonable people would not want to gamble with
their lives in this way. Perhaps he was wrong about this.

For much of the twentieth century philosophers had lost
touch with the great thinkers of the past. Rawls’ Theory of Justice
was one of the very few works of political philosophy written in
that century that are worth mentioning in the same breath as
those by Aristotle, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Hume and Kant.

Rawls himself would have been far too modest to agree. His
example, though, has inspired a generation of philosophers
writing today, including Michael Sandel, Thomas Pogge, Martha
Nussbaum and Will Kymlicka: they all believe that philosophy
should engage with the deep and difficult questions about how
we can and should live together. Unlike some philosophers of
the previous generation, they aren’t afraid of trying to answer
them and to stimulate social change. They believe philosophy
should actually change how we live, not just change how we
discuss how we live.

Another philosopher who holds this kind of view is Peter
Singer. He’s the subject of the final chapter of this book. But
before looking at his ideas, we are going to explore a question
that is becoming more pertinent daily: ‘Can Computers Think?’