The Consolation of Philosophy
Boethius

If you were in prison awaiting execution would you spend your
last days writing a philosophy book? Boethius did. It turned out
to be the most popular book that he wrote.

Ancius Manlius Severinus Boethius (475–525), to give him
his full name, was one of the last Roman philosophers. He died
just twenty years before Rome fell to the barbarians. But in his
lifetime Rome was already going downhill. Like his fellow
Romans Cicero and Seneca, he thought of philosophy as a kind
of self-help, a practical way of making your life go better as well
as a discipline of abstract thought. He also provided a link back
to the Ancient Greeks Plato and Aristotle whose work he trans-
lated into Latin, keeping their ideas alive at a time when there
was a risk that they might be lost for ever. As a Christian, his
writing appealed to the devoutly religious philosophers who
read his books in the Middle Ages. His philosophy, then, made
a bridge from Greek and Roman thinkers forward to the
Christian philosophy that would dominate the West for centu-
ries after his death.

Boethius’ life was a mixture of good and bad luck. King
Theodoric, a Goth who ruled Rome at the time, gave him the
high office of Consul. He made Boethius’ sons consuls too as a
special honour, even though they were too young to have got
there by their own merit. Everything seemed to be going right
for him. He was rich, from a good family, and showered with
praise. Somehow he managed to find time for his philosophical
studies alongside his work for the government, and he was a
prolific writer and translator. He was having a great time. But
then his luck changed. Accused of plotting against Theodoric,
he was sent away from Rome to Ravenna where he was held in
prison, tortured and then executed by a combination of stran-
gulation and being beaten to death. He always maintained that
he was innocent, but his accusers didn’t believe him.

While in prison, knowing that he was soon to die, Boethius
wrote a book that, after his death, became a medieval bestseller,
The Consolation of Philosophy. It opens with Boethius in
his prison cell feeling sorry for himself. Suddenly he realizes
that there is a woman looking down at him. Her height seems
to change from average to higher than the sky. She is wearing
a torn dress embroidered with a ladder that rises from the
Greek letter pi at the hem up to the letter theta. In one hand
she holds a sceptre, in the other books. This woman turns
out to be Philosophy. When she speaks, she tells Boethius what
he should believe. She is angry with him for forgetting about
her, and has come to remind him how he should be reacting to
what has happened to him. The rest of the book is their conver-
sation, which is all about luck and God. It is written partly
in prose and partly in poetry. The woman, Philosophy, gives
him advice.

She tells Boethius that luck always changes, and that he
shouldn’t be surprised by this. That’s the nature of luck. It is
fickle. The wheel of Fortune turns. Sometimes you are at the
top; sometimes you are at the bottom. A wealthy king can find
himself in poverty in a day. Boethius should realize that’s just
the way it is. Luck is random. There is no guarantee that because
you are lucky today you will be lucky tomorrow.

Mortals, Philosophy explains, are foolish to let their happiness
depend on something so changeable. True happiness can only
come from inside, from the things that human beings can
control, not from anything that bad luck can destroy. This is the
Stoic position that we looked at in Chapter 5. When people
describe themselves as ‘philosophical’ about bad things happening
to them today, this is what they mean; they try not to be affected
by things outside their control, like the weather or who their
parents are. Nothing, Philosophy tells Boethius, is terrible in itself
– it all depends on how you think about it. Happiness is a state of
mind, not of the world, an idea Epictetus would have recognized
as his own.

Philosophy wants Boethius to turn once again to her. She tells
him he can be truly happy despite being in prison waiting to be
killed. She is going to cure him of his distress. The message is
that riches, power and honour are worthless since they can
come and go. No one should base their happiness on such
fragile foundations. Happiness has to come from something
that is more solid, something that can’t be taken away. As
Boethius believed that he would continue to live after death,
seeking happiness in trivial worldly things was a mistake. He
would lose them all at death anyway.

But where can Boethius find true happiness? Philosophy’s
answer is that he will find it in God or goodness (these turn out
to be the same thing). Boethius was an early Christian, but
doesn’t mention this in The Consolation of Philosophy. The God
that Philosophy describes could be Plato’s God, the pure Form
of goodness. But later readers would recognize Christian
teaching about the worthlessness of honour and riches, and the
importance of focusing on pleasing God.

Throughout the book Philosophy reminds Boethius of what
he already knows. That is again something that comes from
Plato, since Plato believed that all learning is really a kind of
recollection of ideas we already have. We never really learn
anything new, just have our memories jogged. Life is a struggle
to recall what we knew earlier. What Boethius already knows at
some level is that he was wrong to worry about his loss of
freedom and public respect. Those are largely outside his
control. What matters is his attitude to his situation, and that is
something he can choose.

But Boethius is puzzled by a genuine problem that has
worried many people who believe in God. God, being perfect,
must know everything that has happened, but also everything
that will happen. That is what we mean when we describe God
as ‘all-knowing’. So if God exists, he must know who will win
the next World Cup, and what I’m going to write next. He must
have foreknowledge of everything that will ever happen. What
he foresees must necessarily happen. So at this moment God
knows how everything will turn out.

It follows from all this that God must know what I’m going to
do next, even if I’m not yet sure what that will be. At the time
when I make a decision about what to do, different possible
futures seem to lie open to me. If I come to a fork in the road, I
can go left or right, or perhaps just sit down. I could at this
moment stop writing and go and make myself some coffee. Or
else I can choose to carry on typing on my laptop. That feels like
my decision, something I can choose to do or not do. No one is
forcing me one way or the other. Similarly, you could choose to
close your eyes now if you wanted to. How can that be when
God knows what we’ll end up doing?

If God already knows what we are both going to do, how can
either of us have a genuine choice about what we are going to
do? Is choice just an illusion? It seems that I can’t have free will
if God knows everything. Ten minutes ago God could have
written on a piece of paper, ‘Nigel will carry on writing.’ It was
true then, and so I necessarily would carry on writing, whether
or not I realized this at the time. But if he could have done that,
then surely I didn’t have a choice about what I did, even though
it felt as if I did. My life was already mapped out for me in every
tiniest detail. And if we don’t have any choice about our actions,
how is it fair to punish or reward us for what we do? If we can’t
choose what to do, then how can God decide whether or not we
shall go to heaven?

This is very perplexing. It is what philosophers call a paradox.
It does not seem possible that someone could know what I am
going to do and that I would still have free choice about what I
do. These two ideas seem to contradict each other. Yet both are
plausible if you believe that God is all-knowing.

But Philosophy, the woman in Boethius’ cell, has some
answers. We do have free will, she tells him. That isn’t an illu-
sion. Although God knows what we will do, our lives aren’t
predestined. Or to put it another way, God’s knowledge of what
we will do is different from predestination (the idea that we
have no choice about what we will do). We do still have a choice
about what to do next. The mistake is to think of God as if he
were a human being seeing things unfolding in time. Philosophy
tells Boethius that God is timeless, outside time altogether.

What this means is that God grasps everything in an instant.
God sees past, present and future as one. We mortals are stuck
with one thing happening after another, but that is not how God
sees it. The reason why God can know the future without
destroying our free will and turning us into some kind of pre-
programmed machines with no choice at all is that God observes
us at no particular time at all. He sees everything in one go in a
timeless sort of way. And, Philosophy tells Boethius, he should
not forget that God judges human beings on how they behave,
the choices they make, even though he knows in advance what
they will do.

If Philosophy is right about this, and if God exists, he knows
exactly when I’m going to end this sentence; but it is still my free
choice to end with a full stop right here.

You, meanwhile, are still free to decide whether or not to read
the next chapter, which looks at two arguments for believing in
God’s existence.