Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

Practical Bliss
Jeremy Bentham

If you visit University College London you may be surprised to
find Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), or rather what’s left of his
body, in a glass case. He is sitting looking out at you, with his
favourite walking cane that he nicknamed ‘Dapple’ resting
across his knees. His head is made of wax. The real one is
mummified and kept in a wooden box, though it used to be
on display. Bentham thought that his actual body – he called
it an auto-icon – would make a better memorial than a statue.
So when he died in 1832 he left instructions about how to deal
with his remains. The idea has never really caught on, though
Lenin’s body was embalmed and put on display in a special
mausoleum.

Some of Bentham’s other ideas were more practical. Take his
design for a circular prison, the Panopticon. He described it as
‘a machine for grinding rogues honest’. A watchtower in the
middle allows a few guards to keep an eye on a large number of
prisoners without them knowing whether or not they’re being
watched. This design principle is used in some modern prisons
and even several libraries. It was one of his many projects for
social reform.

But far more important and influential than this was
Bentham’s theory about how we should live. Known as utilitari-
anism or the Greatest Happiness Principle, this is the idea that
the right thing to do is whatever will produce the most happi-
ness. Although not the first person to suggest this approach to
morality (Francis Hutcheson, for instance, had already done
so), Bentham was the first to explain in detail how it might be
put into practice. He wanted to reform the laws of England so
that they were more likely to bring about greater happiness.

But what is happiness? Different people seem to use the word
in different ways. Bentham had a straightforward answer to the
question. It’s all about how you feel. Happiness is pleasure and
the absence of pain. More pleasure, or a greater quantity of
pleasure than pain, means more happiness. For him, human
beings were very simple. Pain and pleasure are the great guides
to living that nature has given us. We seek pleasurable experi-
ences and avoid painful ones. Pleasure is the only thing that is
good in itself. Everything else we want because we believe it will
give us pleasure or help us avoid pain. So if you want an ice
cream, that isn’t a good thing to have just for its own sake. The
point of the ice cream is that it is likely to give you pleasure
when you eat it. Similarly you try to avoid burning yourself
because that would be painful.

How do you go about measuring happiness? Think about a
time when you were really happy. What did it feel like? Could
you put a number on your happiness? For instance, was it at a
level of seven or eight out of ten? I can remember a trip on a
water taxi leaving Venice that felt like a nine-and-a-half or
maybe even a ten when the driver accelerated away with the sun
setting over the beautiful view, the spray from the lagoon in my
face, and my wife and children laughing with excitement. It
doesn’t seem absurd to be able to give a mark for experiences
like this. Bentham certainly believed that pleasure could be
quantified and different pleasures compared on the same scale,
in the same units.

The Felicific Calculus was the name he gave to his method
for calculating happiness. First, work out how much pleasure a
particular action will bring about. Take into account how long
the pleasure will last, how intense it is, how likely it is that it will
give rise to further pleasures. Then subtract any units of pain
that might be caused by your action. What you are left with is
the happiness value of the action. Bentham called this its
‘utility’, meaning usefulness, because the more pleasure an
action brings about the more useful it is to society. That’s why
the theory is known as utilitarianism. Compare the utility of an
action with the scores for other possible actions and choose the
one that brings about most happiness. Simple.

What about the sources of pleasure, though? Surely it’s better
to get pleasure from something uplifting like reading poetry
than from playing a childish game or eating ice cream, isn’t it?
Not according to Bentham. How the pleasure is produced
doesn’t matter at all. For him, daydreaming would be as good as
seeing a Shakespeare play if they made you equally happy. He
used the example of pushpin – a mindless game popular in his
day – and poetry. All that counts is the amount of pleasure
produced. If the pleasure is the same, the value of the activity is
the same: from a utilitarian view, pushpin can be as morally
good as reading poetry.

Immanuel Kant, as we saw in Chapter 20, argued that we have
duties, such as ‘never lie’ that apply in all situations. Bentham,
however, believed that the rightness or wrongness of what we do
comes down to the likely results. These can differ according to
circumstances. Lying isn’t necessarily always wrong. There might
be times when telling a lie is the right thing to do. If, on balance,
greater happiness results from telling a lie than not, then that is
the morally right action in those circumstances. If a friend asks
you whether a new pair of jeans is flattering or not, someone
who followed Kant would have to tell the truth even if it wasn’t
what their friend wanted to hear; a utilitarian would work out
whether greater happiness would result from telling a mild lie. If
it would, then the lie is the right response.

Utilitarianism was a radical theory to put forward at the end
of the eighteenth century. One reason was that in calculating
happiness everyone’s happiness was equal; in Bentham’s words,
‘Everybody to count for one, nobody to count for more than
one’. No one gets special treatment. The pleasure of an aristocrat
counted no more than the pleasure of a poor worker. That was
not how society was ordered then. Aristocrats had a very great
influence over how land was used, and many even had a heredi-
tary right to sit in the House of Lords and decide on the laws of
England. Not surprisingly, some felt uncomfortable with
Bentham’s stress on equality. Perhaps even more radical for the
time was his belief that animals’ happiness was relevant. Because
they are capable of pleasure and pain, animals were part of his
happiness equation. It didn’t matter that animals couldn’t reason
or speak (though it would have done to Kant); those weren’t the
relevant features for moral inclusion in Bentham’s view. What
mattered was their capacity for pain and pleasure. This is the
basis of many present-day campaigns for animal welfare, such
as Peter Singer’s (see Chapter 40).

Unfortunately for Bentham, there’s a devastating criticism of
his general approach with its emphasis on all possible causes of
pleasure being treated equally. Robert Nozick (1938–2002)
invented this thought experiment. Imagine a virtual reality
machine that gives you the illusion of living your life, but
removes all the risk of pain and suffering. Once you have been
plugged into this machine for a short while, you will forget that
you are no longer experiencing reality directly and will be
completely taken in by the illusion. This machine generates a
whole range of pleasurable experiences for you. It is like a
dream generator – it can make you imagine that, for example,
you are scoring the winning goal in the World Cup, or having
the vacation of your dreams. Whatever will give you the greatest
pleasure can be simulated. Now, since this machine would
clearly maximize your blissful mental states, you should, on
Bentham’s analysis, plug into it for the whole of your life. That
would be the best way to maximize pleasure and minimize pain.
Yet many people, though they might enjoy experimenting with
such a machine from time to time, would refuse to plug in for
life because there are other things they value more highly than
a series of blissful mental states. What this seems to show is that
Bentham was wrong to argue that all ways of bringing about the
same amount of pleasure are equally valuable, and that not
everyone is guided solely by a desire to maximize their pleasure
and minimize their pain. This is a theme that was taken up by
his exceptional pupil and later critic, John Stuart Mill.

Bentham was immersed in his own age, keen to find solu-
tions to the social problems that surrounded him. Georg
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel claimed to be able to stand back and
get an overview of the entire course of human history, a history
that was unfolding according to a pattern that only the most
impressive intellects could grasp.