Nigel Warburton, A Little History of Philosophy

Bewitched by Language
Ludwig Wittgenstein

If you found yourself at one of the seminars Ludwig Wittgenstein
(1889–1951) held in Cambridge in 1940 you would very quickly
realize that you were in the presence of someone very unusual.
Most people who met him thought he was a genius. Bertrand
Russell described him as ‘passionate, profound, intense and domi-
nating’. This small Viennese man with bright blue eyes and a deep
seriousness about him would pace up and down, asking students
questions, or pause lost in thought for minutes at a time. No one
dared interrupt. He didn’t lecture from prepared notes, but thought
through the issues in front of his audience, using a series of exam-
ples to tease out what was at stake. He told his students not to
waste their time reading philosophy books; if they took such
books seriously, he said, they should throw them across the room
and get on with thinking hard about the puzzles they raised.

His own first book, the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1922),
was written in numbered short sections, many of which read
more like poetry than philosophy. Its main message was that the
most important questions about ethics and religion lie beyond
the limits of our understanding and that if we can’t talk mean-
ingfully about them, we should stay silent.

A central theme in this later work was ‘bewitchment by
language’. Language leads philosophers into all sorts of confu-
sion, he believed. They fall under its spell. Wittgenstein saw his
role as that of a therapist who would make much of this confu-
sion go away. The idea was that you would follow the logic of his
various carefully chosen examples and that as you did this your
philosophical problems would vanish. What had seemed terribly
important would no longer be a problem.

One cause of philosophical confusion was, he suggested, the
assumption that all language works in the same way – the idea
that words simply name things. He wanted to demonstrate to
his readers that there are many ‘language games’, different
activities that we perform using words. There is no ‘essence’ of
language, no single common feature that explains the whole
range of its uses.

If you see a group of people who are related to each other, at
a wedding for example, you may be able to recognize members
of the family from physical resemblances between them. That is
what Wittgenstein meant by a ‘family resemblance’. So you may
look a bit like your mother in some ways – perhaps you both
have the same hair and eye colour – and a bit like your grandfa-
ther in that you are both tall and slim. You might also have the
same hair colour and eye shape as your sister, but she might
have different-coloured eyes from you and your mother. There
is not one single feature that every member of the family shares
that makes it straightforward to see that you are all part of the
same genetically related family. Instead, there is a pattern of
overlapping resemblances, with some of you sharing some
features, and others sharing different features. That pattern of
overlapping resemblances is what interested Wittgenstein. He
used this metaphor of family resemblance to explain something
important about how language works.

Think about the word ‘game’. There are lots of different things
that we call games: board games like chess, card games like
bridge and patience, sports like football, and so on. There are
also other things that we call games, such as games of hide-and-
seek or games of make-believe. Most people just assume that
because we use the same word – ‘game’ – to cover all these, there
must be a single feature that they all have in common, the
‘essence’ of the concept ‘game’. But rather than just assuming
that there is such a common denominator, Wittgenstein urges
his readers to ‘Look and see’. You might think that games all
have a winner and a loser, but what about solitaire, or the
activity of throwing a ball at a wall and catching it? Both of these
are games, but obviously there isn’t a loser. Or what about the
idea that what they have in common is a set of rules? But some
games of make-believe don’t seem to have rules. For every
candidate for a common feature of all games, Wittgenstein
comes up with a counter-example, a case of something that is a
game but that doesn’t seem to share the suggested ‘essence’ of all
games. Instead of assuming that all games have a single thing in
common, he thinks we should see words like ‘game’ as ‘family
resemblance terms’.

When Wittgenstein described language as a series of ‘language
games’ he was drawing attention to the fact that there are many
different things that we use language for, and that philosophers
have become confused because they mostly think that all language
is doing the same sort of thing. In one of his famous descriptions
of his aim as a philosopher, he said that what he wanted to do was
show the fly the way out of the fly bottle. A typical philosopher
will buzz around like a fly trapped in a bottle, banging against the
sides. The way to ‘solve’ a philosophical problem was to remove
the cork and let the fly out. What this meant was that he wanted
to show the philosopher that he or she had been asking the wrong
questions or had been misled by language.

Take St Augustine’s description of how he had learnt to speak.
In his Confessions, he suggested that the older people around
him would point to objects and name them. He sees an apple,
someone points to it and says ‘apple’. Gradually Augustine
understood what the words meant and was able to use them to
tell other people what he wanted. Wittgenstein took this account
to be a case of someone assuming that all language had an
essence, a single function. The single function was to name
objects. For Augustine, every word has a meaning that it stands
for. In place of this picture of language, Wittgenstein encourages
us to see language use as a series of activities that are tied up
with the practical lives of speakers. We should think of language
as more like a tool bag containing many different sorts of tools,
rather than as, for example, always serving the function that a
screwdriver does.

It may seem obvious to you that when you are in pain and
you speak about it what you are doing is using words which
name the particular sensation you have. But Wittgenstein tries
to disrupt that view of the language of sensation. It’s not that
you don’t have a sensation. It’s just that, logically, your words
can’t be the names of sensations. If everybody had a box with a
beetle in that they never showed to anyone, it wouldn’t really
matter what was in the box when they talked to one another
about their ‘beetle’. Language is public, and it requires publicly
available ways of checking that we are making sense. When a
child learns to ‘describe’ her pain, Wittgenstein says, what
happens is that the parent encourages the child to do various
things, such as say ‘It hurts’ – the equivalent in many ways to the
quite natural expression ‘Aaargh!’ Part of his message here is
that we should not think of the words ‘I am in pain’ as a way of
naming a private sensation. If pains and other sensations really
were private we would need a special private language to
describe them. But Wittgenstein thought that idea didn’t make
sense. Another of his examples may help explain why he
thought this.

A man decides that he will keep a record of every time he has
a particular kind of sensation for which there is no name –
perhaps a specific kind of tingle. He writes ‘S’ in his diary when-
ever he feels that special tingling sensation. ‘S’ is a word in his
private language – no one else knows what he means by it. This
sounds as if it is possible. It isn’t difficult to imagine a man
doing exactly this. But then, think a bit harder. How does he
know when he gets a tingle that it really is a further example of
the type ‘S’ he’s decided to record and not another kind of
tingle? He can’t go back and check it against anything except his
memory of having an earlier ‘S’ tingling experience. That’s not
really good enough, though, because he could be completely
mistaken about it. It isn’t a reliable way of telling that you are
using the word in the same way.

The point he was trying to make with his example of the
diary was that the way we use words to describe our experiences
can’t be based on a private linking of the experience with the
word. There must be something public about it. We can’t have
our own private language. And if that is true, the idea that the
mind is like a locked theatre that no one else can get into is
misleading. For Wittgenstein, then, the idea of a private language
of sensations doesn’t make sense at all. This is important – and
difficult to grasp too – because many philosophers before him
thought that each individual’s mind was completely private.

Although Christian by religion, the Wittgenstein family was
considered Jewish under Nazi laws. Ludwig spent part of the
Second World War working as an orderly in a London hospital,
but his extended family were lucky to escape from Vienna. Had
they not, Adolf Eichmann might have overseen their deporta-
tion to the death camps. Eichmann’s involvement in the
Holocaust and his later trial for crimes against humanity were
the focus of Hannah Arendt’s reflections on the nature of evil.