Book II
---
With these words I thought I had finished what I had to say, but I was wrong.
Apparently it was only an introduction. Glaucon is an extremely determined
character in everything he does, and on this occasion he refused to accept
Thrasymachus's surrender. Socrates he said, do you really want to convince us
that it is in every way better to be just than unjust or is it enough merely to
seem to have convinced us? I would prefer I said, really to convince you if I
had a choice. In that case he said, you are not achieving your aim. Tell me this
do you think there is a good of the kind we would choose to have because we
value it for its own sake and not from any desire for its results? Enjoyment for
example, and pleasures which are harmless and produce no consequences for the
future beyond enjoyment for the person who possesses them. Yes I said, I do
think there is a good of this kind. What about the sort we value both for itself
and for its consequences, things like intelligence and sight and health, we value
goods of this sort I imagine for both reasons. Yes I said. And can you
distinguish a third class or category of good he asked, a class which contains
physical exercise, undergoing medical treatment when we are ill, practicing
medicine and earning a living in general. These we would describe as unpleasant
but beneficial. We would not choose to have them for their own sakes, but only
for the payment or other benefits which result from them. Yes I said, there is
this third class as well. What of it? In which of these classes he asked, do you
put justice? In my opinion I replied, it is in the best class, the class which is
to be valued by anyone who wants to be happy both for itself and for its
consequences. That's not what most people think he said, most people would put
it in the unpleasant class which we should cultivate in return for payment and
reputation on account of public opinion, but which purely for itself is to be
avoided like the plague. I know that's what they think I said, Thrasymachus
criticized it and praised injustice on those grounds some while back. But I'm a
slow learner apparently. Well he said, listen to me as well and see if you agree
with what I suggest, I think Thrasymachus too readily allowed himself to be
bewitched by you, like a snake being charmed by a snake charmer. As far as I'm
concerned, the proof is not yet convincing. Either for justice or injustice I want
to be told what each of them is and what effect it has just by itself when it is
present in the soul. I want to forget about the rewards and results it brings,
so here's what I'm going to do if you have no objection, I'm going to revive
Thrasymachus's definition. First I shall say what kind of thing people reckon
justice is and how they think it arises. Secondly I shall claim that all those
who practice it, do so as something unavoidable against their will and not
because they regard it as a good. Thirdly I shall say that this is a rational
way for them to behave, since the unjust man in their view, has a much better
life than the just man. These are not my own opinions Socrates, but I'm going to
make the most powerful speech I can in defence of the unjust life, and I want to
hear you in your turn criticizing injustice and defending justice. There you
are, see if you approve of my suggestion. I'd like nothing better I replied.
That's good he said. Now listen to the first thing I said I was going to talk
about. What sort of thing justice is and how it arises. Doing wrong men say is
by its nature a good, and being wronged an evil. But the evil of being wronged
outweighs the good of doing wrong. As a result, when people wrong one another and
are wronged by one another and get a taste of both. Those who are unable to
avoid the one and achieve the other think it'll pay them to come to an agreement
with one another, not to do wrong and not to be wronged. That's how they come to
start making laws and agreements with one another and calling lawful and just
that which is laid down by the law. They say that justice is a compromise
between the best case which is doing wrong and getting away with it. And the
worst case which is being wronged and being unable to retaliate. The easiest way
to see that it is true is to imagine something like this. Suppose we gave each
of them, the just and the unjust, the freedom to do whatever he liked. Suppose
they had the kind of power they say the ancestor of Gyges, the Lydian once had.
They say he was a shepherd and that he was a surf of the man who was at that
time the ruler of Lydia. One day there was a great rainstorm and an earthquake
in the place where he grazed his sheep. Part of the ground opened up and a great
hole appeared in it. He was astonished when he saw it but went down into it. And
the legend has it that among many marvels, he saw a hollow horse made of bronze
with windows in it. Peeping through them he saw inside what appeared to be a
corpse, larger than human wearing nothing but a golden ring on its hand. They
say he removed the ring and came out. The shepherds were having one of their
regular meetings so that they could give the king their monthly report on the
flocks, and the man turned up as well wearing the ring. As he sat with the rest
of them, he happened to twist the setting of the ring towards him into the palm
of his hand. When he did this, he became invisible to those who were sitting with
him, and they started talking about him as if he'd gone. He was amazed and
twisted the ring again, turning the setting to the outside. As soon as he did
so, he became visible. When he realized this, he started experimenting with the
ring to see if it did have this power. And he found that was how it was.
When he turned the setting to the inside he became invisible, when he turned it
to the outside he became visible. Once he had established this, he lost no time
arranging to be one of those making the report of the king. When he got there he
seduced the king's wife, plotted with her against the king, killed him and
seized power. Imagine there were two rings like that, and the just man wore one,
while the unjust man wore the other. People think that no one would be
sufficiently iron-willed to remain within the bounds of justice. No one could
bring himself to keep his hands off other people's possessions and steer clear
of them if he was free to take whatever he liked without a second thought, in
the marketplace or go into people's houses and sleep with anyone he liked, or if
he could kill or release from prison anyone he chose, and in general go around
acting like a god among men. This is a strong argument you might say, for the
claim that no one is just voluntarily but only under compulsion. Justice is not
thought to be a good thing for individuals, since wherever anyone thinks he can
do wrong he does do wrong. Every man believes injustice to be much more
profitable for the individual than justice. And he will be right to think this
according to the person putting forward this view. Anyone who came into
possession of the kind of freedom I have described, and then refused ever to do
anything wrong, and did not lay a finger on other people's possessions would be
regarded by observers as the most pathetic and brainless of creatures. Though of
course in public they would praise him, lying to one another, because of their
fear of being wronged. That's all I have to say about that claim. As for the
choice between the lives of the people in question, the only way we can make it
properly is by contrasting the completely just man with the completely unjust
man. How shall we contrast them? Like this, we will subtract nothing either from
the injustice of the unjust man or from the justice of the just man. Let's
assume if the unjust man is going to be really unjust that he goes about his
wrongdoings in the right way and gets away with it. The one who gets caught is
to be regarded as incompetent since perfect injustice consists in appearing to
be just when you are not. We must credit the completely unjust man then, with the
most complete injustice. To the person who commits the greatest wrongs we must
not deny, in fact we must grant, the enjoyment of the greatest reputation for
justice. That is our model of the unjust man. Beside him, let us put our
imaginary just man, a simple and honourable man, who wants, in Aeschylus's words,
not to appear to be good but to be good. We must deprive him of the appearance
since if he appears to be just, the appearance of justice will bring him
recognition and rewards. And then it will not be clear whether his motive for
being just was a desire for justice, or a desire for the rewards and the
recognition. So we must strip him of everything but justice. We must put him in
a situation which is the opposite of our previous example. Despite doing nothing
wrong, he must have the worst possible reputation for injustice. Let him live
out his life like this without any change until the day of his death, appearing
to be unjust though actually being just. And if both their situations are as I
have described, it shouldn't be beyond us I imagine, to give a full account of
the kind of life which awaits each of them. So that is what I must do now. What
Aeschylus said turns out to be a much more accurate description of the unjust
man, who wants not to appear to be unjust but to be unjust. In the first place
they will say, he can be a ruler in his city because of his reputation for
justice. Secondly, he can marry where he likes. Give his daughters in marriage
to whom he chooses, and make contracts and partnerships with anyone he wishes.
Besides all this, he finds it easy to make himself a rich man since he has no
compunction about acting unjustly. That is why they say, he is successful in
political and legal disputes both public and private and why he gets the better
of his enemies. By getting the better of them, he grows rich and can help his
friends and harm his enemies. He can make full and generous sacrifices and
offerings to the gods, and is much better able than the just man to serve the
gods and that part of mankind whom he chooses to serve. As a result they claim,
he is in all probability, more likely than the just man to be the god's
favourite!

Well I said, that was certainly an inspired performance. To be able to speak
like that in favour of injustice without being convinced it is a better thing
than justice. And I believe you when you say you are really not convinced, though
from what you actually said, I wouldn't have believed you. The trouble is, the
more firmly I believe you, the less certain I am what to do next. I can't defend
justice, I don't think I have the ability. I say that because you have rejected
the arguments by which I thought I'd proved to Thrasymachus that justice was
something better than injustice. On the other hand, I can't not defend her since
I can't help feeling it is wrong to stand idly by when I hear justice coming
under attack and not come to her defence, for as long as I have breath in my body
and a tongue in my head. Well, Glaucon and the rest of them insisted that they
wanted me to make a defence and not abandon the argument. So I adopted what
seemed to me the best approach. The inquiry we are undertaking is not a simple
matter if you ask me, it requires sharp eyesight and since we are not clever
people, I think we should conduct our search in the same sort of way, as we would
if our eyesight were not very good. And we were told to read some small writing
from from a bit of a distance away, and then one of us realized that a larger
copy of the same writing apparently was to be found somewhere else on some
larger surface. We would regard it as a stroke of luck I think, to be able to
read the large letters first and then turn our attention to the small ones, to
see if they really did say the same thing. We certainly would, said Adeimantus,
but where can you see anything like that in our search for justice? I'll tell
you I said. We say that there is justice in an individual but also, I take it,
justice in a whole city. Yes. And a city is something bigger than an individual?
Yes it is. In that case maybe justice will be on a larger scale, in what is
larger and easier to find out about. So if you approve why don't we start by
finding out what sort of thing it is in cities. After that we can make a similar
inquiry into the individual, trying to find the likeness of the larger version
in the form the smaller takes. I think that's a good idea he said. Suppose then
I said, we were to study the theoretical origin of a city, would we also see the
origin in it of justice and injustice? We might he said. And if we do that, is
there a chance that what we are looking for will be easier to find? Yes much
easier. You think then that this is a task we should attempt to complete. I
suspect it is a fairly major undertaking, so you decide. We have decided said
Adeimantus, go ahead. Very well I said. The origin of a city lies, I think, in the
fact that we are not any of us self-sufficient, we have all sorts of needs. Can
you think of any other reason for the foundation of a city? No I can't. In this
way then, different individuals may form associations with one person to meet one
need, and with another person to meet a different need. With this variety of
wants, they may collect a number of partners and allies into one place of
habitation. And to this joint habitation, we give the name city, don't we? Yes
we do. Does one person share with another when he does share, or does he accept a
share because he thinks it is better for him personally. Yes he does. Right then
I said, let's construct a hypothetical city from the beginning, it is the
product apparently, of our needs. Of course, and the first and most important of
those needs if we are to exist and stay alive is the provision of food.
Unquestionably. Second comes the need for housing, and third the need for
clothing and things like that. That is right. Well then I said, how will our city be
equal to meeting these requirements? Won't it just be one farmer plus a builder
plus a weaver? Or should we add a shoemaker as well and anyone else who provides
for physical needs. Yes we should. So the most basic city would have to consist
of four or five men. It looks like it. Well then, will a single individual do
better exercising a number of skills, or will each do best concentrating on one?
Concentrating on one he replied. And another thing, it is clear I think, that if
you let the right moment for a task pass by, the task suffers. Yes that is clear.
That is because the task in hand will not wait for the person doing it to have a
spare moment, so it is essential that whoever is doing it should concentrate on
it and not regard it as a hobby. Yes it is essential. It follows from this that
in any enterprise more is produced and that it is better and more easily
produced when one person does a single task which is suited to his nature, and
does it at the right time keeping himself free from other tasks. It certainly
does. Then it will take more than four citizens Adeimantus, to provide for the
needs we were talking about. The farmer, it appears, will not make himself a
plow with his own hands, not if it's going to be a good plow, nor a hoe nor any
of his other farming implements. No more will the builder who all also needs a
number of tools, and the same goes for the weaver and the shoemaker. True. So
carpenters and bronzesmiths and a whole lot of skilled workers of that kind,
will become partners in our little city and make the place quite crowded. They
will. All the same it still won't be all that large even if we add cattlemen,
shepherds, and other herdsmen so that the farmers can have oxen for plowing, and
so that builders as well as the farmers will be able to use animals for carrying
materials, and so that weavers and shoemakers can have hides and wool. It
certainly won't be a small city he said, if it contains all that. That's not all
I said, it will be more or less impossible to locate the city itself in a place
where it won't need imports. Quite impossible. So it will require yet more
people in addition, to bring it the things it needs from some other city. It
will. What is more, if their agent goes empty-handed, taking nothing which meets
the needs of the people from whom they are importing the things they are short
of, then he will come back empty-handed, won't he? I think so. So in their own
economy, the citizens must not only provide adequately for themselves, they must
also produce the right kind of goods and in large enough quantities for the
people they need to trade with. Yes they must. So our city needs more farmers
and more workers in other occupations. Yes. And more agents as well presumably,
the ones who are going to do all the importing and exporting, these people are
merchants, aren't they? Yes. So we shall need merchants as well. Definitely. And
if our trade is by sea, we shall need a large number of other people as well,
experts on seafaring. Yes a large number. What about trade in the city itself?
How will each group share its production with others? That after all, was our
reason for forming an association and establishing a city. Well obviously he
said, by buying and selling. That will give rise to a marketplace and a
currency, a unit of exchange for transactions. Undoubtedly. But when the farmer
or member of one of the other occupations brings to market part of what he
produces, he may not arrive there at the same moment as those who need to
exchange goods with him. Is he going to sit around in the marketplace, taking
time off from his work? Certainly not he said. There are people who identify
this need and make themselves available for this activity. In a well-run city
they tend to be the weakest physically, those who are useless for any other kind
of work. They have to wait around there in the marketplace, receiving goods in
exchange for money from those who have something to sell, and then again money
in return for goods from all those who want to buy. So this is the need I said,
which brings dealers into our city. Don't we call people dealers if they sit in
the marketplace offering a selling and buying service, whereas those who travel
around the cities we call merchants? We do. And there is still another group of
people I think, offering a service. We certainly would not want them as partners
or associates for their mental attributes, but they possess physical strength
suitable for manual labour, this they offer for sale and the price they put on
it they call their hire. That I imagine, is why they in turn are called hired
labourers, isn't that right? Yes. So hired labourers it seems, will also go to
fill up our city. I think they may. Well then Adeimantus, is our city large
enough? Is it complete? Maybe it is. In which case where exactly are justice and
injustice to be found? In it, in which of the elements we have examined have they
made their appearance. Speaking for myself Socrate, he said. I have no idea
unless I suppose it is in some sort of need, which those elements have of one
another. I think that may be the right answer I said. We must examine it without
hesitation. Let's look first at the way people will spend their time in an
economy of this kind. Won't it be that they produce bread and wine and clothing
and shoes, they will build themselves houses. In summer they will go about their
work lightly clad and barefoot. And in winter, they will be properly clothed and
shod. They will live on barley meal and wheat flour, kneading and baking these,
they will have fine barley cakes or wheat loaves served on reeds or fresh
leaves. They will eat lying on straw beds covered with bryony and myrtle. They
can live very well like this, they and their children. Drinking wine after their
meals, wearing garlands on their heads, and singing the praises of the gods, they
will live quite happily with one another. They will have no more children than
they can afford, and they will avoid poverty and war.

At this point Glaucon
interrupted. No art of cookery apparently for these people you describe as
living so well? That's a good point I said. I forgot that they will have the art
of cookery. Obviously they will use salt and olives and cheese and they will
boil the usual country dishes of wild roots and vegetables. And for dessert, we
can offer them figs and chickpeas and beans, and they will roast myrtle berries
and acorns in front of the fire, with a modest amount to drink. In this way,
living lives which are peaceful and in all probability healthy, they will die in
old age, handing down the same way of life to their descendants. If you were
organizing a city of pigs Socrates, isn't that just how you would feed them?
Well what sort of meals should we give them Glaucon, I asked. The kind we're
used to. If they're going to eat in comfort, they should lie on couches, eat off
tables and have the cooked dishes and desserts which people today have! I see I
replied. So we're not just looking at the origin of a city apparently, we're
looking at the origin of a luxurious city. Maybe that's not such a bad idea, if
we look at that sort of city we may perhaps see the point where justice and
injustice come into existence in cities. I think the true city, the healthy
version as it were, is the one we have just described. But let's look also at
the swollen and inflamed city if that is what you prefer, we can easily do that,
what's to stop us. All this and this way of life will not it seems, be enough
for some people. They will have couches and tables and other furniture in
addition, and cooked dishes of course and incense perfumes, call girls, cakes
every variety of all these things. As for those needs we talked about at the
beginning, we can no longer prescribe only the bare necessities: housing,
clothing and shoes, we must introduce painting and decoration and start using
gold and ivory and all those sorts of things, mustn't we? Yes. So once again we
must enlarge our city since our first healthy city is no longer big enough, we
must fill it with a great mass and multitude of things which are no longer what
cities must have as a matter of necessity. For example we must have hunters of
all kinds, artists all those using figure and colour for their imitations, and
those using music, poets and their assistants, reciters, actors, dancers,
producers, and the makers of all sorts of goods, especially those used for
making women look beautiful. What's more, we shall need more people in service.
Don't you think we shall need attendance for our sons, wet nurses, nannies
hairdressers barbers, not to mention cooks and chefs. And besides those, we
shall need people to keep pigs as well, we didn't have them in our earlier city
since there was no need for them. But in this city, there will be a need for
them, as also for all sorts of other livestock in case anyone wants them to eat,
isn't that right? Of course. And living like this will we have much greater need
of doctors than we did before? Yes much greater. What is more, I imagine the
territory which was originally adequate to feed the original population, will no
longer be adequate. It will be too small. Do we accept that? Yes. Do we need
then to carve ourselves a slice of our neighbour's territory if we are going to
have enough for pasturage and plowing. And do they in turn need a slice of our
land if they too give themselves up to the pursuit of unlimited wealth, not
confining themselves to necessities. They're bound to Socrates. And will the
next step be war Glaucon? Or what? War. Let us say nothing for the moment I
said, about whether the effect of war is harmful or beneficial. Let us merely
note that we have discovered in its turn, the origin of war. War arises out of
those things which are the commonest causes of evil in cities when evil does
arise both in private life and public life. Yes. Our city needs to be even
bigger my friend, and not just a bit bigger. We must add to it a whole army
which can go out and fight against invaders and defend all our wealth and the
other things we were talking about just now. What about the citizens themselves,
aren't there enough of them? No I said, not if we were right you and the rest of
us in what we agreed earlier when we were forming our city. Surely we agreed if
you remember that no individual was capable of practicing several arts or skills
properly. True. Well, how about fighting in battle I asked, don't you think that
is essentially an art or skill. Very much so he said. And should we regard the
art of shoe making as more important than the art of war. No. Well then, we
didn't allow our shoemaker to try and be a farmer as well, or a weaver or
builder. He had to be a shoemaker to make sure the business of shoemaking was
carried out properly. In the same way we assigned a single task to each member
of the other occupations, the task he was naturally suited to and for which he
would keep himself free from other tasks, working at it throughout his life and
taking every opportunity to produce good results. Isn't it of the highest
importance that warfare should be carried on as efficiently as possible or is
war so easy that any farmer any shoemaker or any practitioner of any art or
skill can be a soldier as well. Even to be a decent drafts or dice player you
have to have been playing since you were a child, it can't be done in your spare
time. So how can you pick up a shield or any other weapon or instrument of war
and immediately be equipped to take your place in the battle line, or in any of
the other sorts of fighting which occur in time of war. Think of other
instruments, there isn't one of them that will turn a person into a craftsman or
athlete simply by being picked up, or that will be of any use to him if he has
no expertise or has not had enough practice in handling it. No he said. They'd
be extremely valuable instruments if you could. Since the guardian's job then I
said, is the most important, it must correspondingly call for the greatest
freedom from other activities, together with the highest level of expertise and
training. That's certainly my opinion he said. And also of course, a natural
disposition suited to precisely this way of life? Of course. And it would be our
job apparently if we are capable of it to choose which dispositions and which
kinds of dispositions were suited to the defence of the city. That would indeed
be our job. Heavens I said, that's a major responsibility we have taken upon
ourselves. All the same as far as our abilities permit we must try not to back
out of it. Yes we must. Well then I said, when it comes to acting as a guardian,
don't you think that in his disposition a young man of good birth is like a
young pedigree hound? In what way? Well for example, each of them needs acute
senses, speed in pursuit of what they detect and strength as well in case they
catch it and have to fight with it. Yes he said, they need all these qualities.
Plus courage of course if he is to fight well. Of course. But is any living
creature likely to be brave whether horse or dog or anything else if it doesn't
have a spirited and energetic nature? Haven't you noticed what an irresistible
and unconquerable thing spirit is. With spirit any living creature is fearless
and invincible in the face of any danger. Yes I have noticed that. As for the
physical characteristics required of a guardian then they are obvious. Yes. And
the mental requirement is that he should be spirited or energetic. Yes that too.
And do you think the person who's going to be guardian material needs another
quality as well. Do you want him as well as being spirit and energetic to be
also by temperament a lover of wisdom, a philosopher. What do you mean, I don't
understand. It's another thing you see in dogs I replied, something which makes
you wonder at the animal. What is that? When it sees someone it doesn't know, a
dog turns nasty even though it hasn't been badly treated by him in the past.
When it sees someone familiar it welcomes him even if it has never been at all
well treated by him. Haven't you ever found that rather remarkable? I'd never
really thought about it up to now he said, but I think there's no doubt a dog
does behave like that. It seems clever this side of his nature, it seems to show
a true love of wisdom. In what way. Because I replied, it classifies what it
sees as friendly or hostile solely on the fact that it knows one and doesn't
know the the other. It must be a lover of knowledge if it defines friend and
enemy by means of knowledge and ignorance. Yes he said. It must. And are love of
knowledge and love of wisdom or philosophy the same thing? They are. So can we
say with some confidence of a man too that if he's going to be someone who is
gentle towards those he knows and recognizes, he must by his nature be a lover
of knowledge and of wisdom. We can. Then will the person whois going to be a
good and true guardian of our city be a lover of wisdom, spirited swift and
strong. He certainly will.
