Book I
---
I went down to Piraeus yesterday with Glaucon, the son of Ariston, to offer a prayer to the 
goddess, also I wanted to watch the festival to see how they would conduct it since this was 
the first time it was being celebrated. The parade of Athenians struck me as excellent and the 
show put on by the Thracians was every bit as impressive I thought. We offered our prayers 
watched the festival and then started off on our journey back to town. We were already on our 
way home when we were spotted by Polemarchus, the son of Cephalus. He got his slave to run after 
us and tell us to wait for him. The slave tugged at my cloak from behind and said, Polemarchus 
says you are to wait. I turned around and asked him where his master was. There he is, he said, 
coming along behind you, wait for him. We will, said Glaucon. In a few moments Polemarchus 
reached us with Glaucon's brother Adeimantus, Niceratus the son of Nicias, and a few others. 
They had been watching the procession apparently. And Polemarchus said, it looks as if you're 
all on your way back to the city Socrates, you're not staying then? That's not a bad guess, I 
replied. Do you see how many of us there are, he asked, yes, well then he said you must either 
get the better of all these people or else stay here. There is another possibility I said. we 
might persuade you that you should let us go. And do you really think you could persuade us he 
said if we refuse to listen? Of course not said Glaucon, in that case make your decision on the 
assumption we're not going to listen. Haven't you heard about the torch race, Adeimantus added. 
this evening on horseback in honour of the Goddess? On horseback I said, that's something new. 
Do you mean a relay race on horseback passing torches from one to another. yes, said Polemarchus 
and they're going to have an all night ceremony as well which should be worth watching, we can 
go out and watch it after dinner. there'll be lots of young people there, we can spend some time 
with them and talk to them, do stay, please say yes. it looks as if we shall have to, said Glaucon 
if that's your decision I said, we shall. 

so we went back to the house of Polemarchus where we found Polemarchus's brothers, Lysias and 
Euthydemus as well as Thrasymachus of Chalcedon, Charmantides from the deme of Paeania, 
and Kleitophon the son of Aristonymus, also there in the house was Polemarchus's father Cephalus, 
it was a long time since I'd seen him and I found him much aged, he was wearing a Garland and 
sitting on a sort of cushioned stool. he'd just been conducting a sacrifice in the courtyard. 
there was a circle of stools around him, so we sat down with him. as soon as he saw me Cephalus 
started to make me welcome, you don't often come down to visit us in Piraeus Socrates he said, 
you should though. if I were still strong enough to make the journey up to town without difficulty, 
there would be no need for you to come here, we would go to you, but as things are, you should 
come more often. I can assure you speaking for myself that the more the pleasures of the body fade 
the greater becomes one's desire and taste for conversation. so do please spend some time with 
these young men, do come here and visit us, regard us as your friends as your family even. 
with pleasure, Cephalus. I replied. I love talking to the very old it's as if they're a long way 
ahead of us on a road which we too are probably going to have to travel. I feel we should learn 
from them what the road is like, whether it's steep and rough going or gentle and easy. In 
particular I'd very much like to hear how it strikes you now that you've actually reached the 
time of life, which the Poets call old age the threshold, what is your report on it? would you 
call it a difficult time of life? I'll tell you exactly how it strikes me Socrates, there's a 
group of us who meet fairly often, we're all about the same age so we're following the words of 
the old proverb. when we meet, most of them start complaining, they say they miss the things 
they used to enjoy when they were young, and they recall their sexual exploits, their drinking 
their feasting and everything connected with those pleasures. they get upset as if they'd 
suffered some great loss, as if then they had led a wonderful life whereas now they're not live 
at all. some of them also complain about the lack of respect shown by their families towards 
old age, and under this heading they recite a litany of grievances against old age. I think 
they're putting the blame in the wrong place Socrates. if old age were to blame, then not only 
would I have felt the same way about old age but so would everyone else who has ever reached this 
age and yet I've met several people who are not like this, most notably, Sophocles the poet, I was 
there once when someone asked him, how is your sex life Sophocles? are you still capable of making 
love to a woman? don't talk about it my good sir was Sophocles's reply, it is with the greatest 
relief that I've escaped it, like escaping from a fierce and frenzied master. I thought that a 
good reply at the time and I still think it a good one now, old age is altogether a time of great 
peace and freedom from that sort of thing. when our appetites fade and loosen their grip on us, 
then what happens is exactly what Sophocles was talking about. it is a final release from a bunch 
of insane masters. both in this and in your relations with your family, there is only one thing 
responsible and that is not old age but your character. for those who are civilized and contented 
then even old age is only a slight burden. otherwise for those who are not like this, both old age 
and youth prove hard to cope with. I was very impressed by what he said and I wanted him to go on 
talking.so I prompted him further, I suspect most people don't believe you Cephalus when you say that, 
they think it is not your character which makes old age easy for you, but the fact that you have plenty 
of money the rich they say have many consolations. and the there's some truth in what they say but 
not as much truth as they think. Themistocles's famous saying is very much to the point here, a man 
from Serifos started making disparaging remarks about him and telling him that his fame was due not 
to his own merits but to those of his city. Themistocles's reply was that though he himself would 
never have been famous if he had been born in Serifos, neither would the other man have been if he 
had been born in Athens. the same applies to those who are not rich and who find old age hard to bear. 
in poverty even the right temperament will not find old age altogether easy, whereas the wrong 
temperament even with the aid of wealth will never be at peace with itself. what would you say is 
the greatest benefit you have derived from your possession of great wealth, I said. one which many 
people might not be inclined to believe if I told them but you can take my word for it Socrates that 
when you are confronted by the thought of your own death, you are visited by fear and anxiety about 
things which never troubled you before, the story is told about what happens in Hades that anyone who 
is unjust here will have to pay for it there, stories you once laughed at begin to trouble your mind 
that's why I attached the greatest importance to the possession of money, not for everyone but for 
those of good character. if you want to avoid defrauding people or lying to them however reluctantly 
or going to the world below in a state of terror after failing to pay what you owe, whether sacrifices 
to a god or money to a man, then the possession of money contributes in no small measure to this end. 
that's admirably put Cephalus I said, but since you've brought up the subject of Justice can we say 
quite simply that it is truthfulness and returning anything you may have received from anyone else, 
or is it sometimes right to behave in these ways and sometimes wrong. let me give you an example, 
suppose you borrowed some weapons from a friend when he was in his right mind, suppose he later went 
mad and then asked for them back again everyone would agree I imagine that you shouldn't give them 
back to him and that anyone who did give them back or who was even prepared to be completely truthful 
to someone in this condition would not be doing the right thing. correct he said. this is not the 
definition of justice then, that it is telling the truth and returning what you have been given. 
yes it is Socrates, Polemarchus interrupted at least it is if we are to believe Simonides. I'd just 
like to say Cephalus put in that this is where I hand the discussion over to you, it's time I was 
doing something about the sacrifices. well am I not Polemarchus, your heir. you certainly are he 
replied with a laugh and went off to his sacrifices.

tell me then I said, you, who have inherited the argument, what does Simonides say about Justice 
that you think is correct. that it is just to pay everyone what is owed to him, that's what he 
says  and I think he's right. well I said, Simonides is a wise and inspired man, it is certainly 
not easy  to disagree with him, but what on earth does he mean by this remark? you may well know 
Polemarchus, I have no idea. he obviously doesn't mean what we were talking about just now, if 
one person gives  something to another for safekeeping and then asks for it back when he's not 
in his right mind.  Simonides doesn't mean that the other person should give it to him and yet I 
imagine the thing which  was given for safekeeping is owed to the person who gave it. isn't it? 
yes, in that situation when  someone goes out of his mind and then asks for it back, isn't 
returning it completely out of the  question? yes it is. that isn't what Simonides means apparently 
when he says that it is just to pay back what is owed or due. no it certainly isn't he said. what 
he thinks is due to friends is to do them good not harm. I understand I replied, if one person 
gives back to to another money which the  other has given him for safekeeping he is not giving 
what is due if he is returning it and the others receiving it are harmful, and if the two of 
them are friends. isn't that what you think Simonides means? yes it is. what about enemies? 
should you give them whatever is in fact due to them? you certainly should he said, and what 
is due between enemies is what is appropriate something harmful. Simonides was speaking as a poet 
then apparently and disguising his definition of justice, what he meant it seems was that Justice 
was giving any individual what was appropriate for him, but he called it what was owed. yes that 
must have been what he meant. suppose then one of us had said to him, Simonides, take the art or 
skill which is called medicine what does it give that is due and appropriate and to what does it 
give it? what do you think his answer would have been. obviously he replied, he would have said 
it gives the body drugs and food and drink. and the art of cookery, what does it give that is due 
and appropriate and to what does it give it? it gives flavour to cooked food. very well, then what 
about the art or skill which we would call Justice, what does it give and to what does it give it? 
well if we're to follow the previous definition Socrates, it gives benefits and injuries to friends 
and enemies. does he mean then that helping your friends and harming your enemies is Justice. I 
think so. all right, when people are unwell when it's a question of sickness and health, who is 
best at helping them if they are friends and harming them if they are enemies? a doctor. and when 
they're at sea who can best help or harm them amid the dangers of a sea voyage? a ship's Captain. 
what about the just man in what activity and for what purpose is he the one best able to treat his 
friends well and his enemies badly. in war and alliances I think. very well, now when people aren't 
ill, my dear Polemarchus, a doctor is nouse to them. true. and when they not at sea, a ship's 
Captain is no use to them.no. does that mean the just man is no use to them when they're not at war. 
no I'm sure it doesn't. Justice is something useful even in peace time then? yes it is. but then 
so is agriculture isn't it? yes. for producing crops? yes. and shoe making. yes that's useful for 
for producing shoes you would say presumably? of course. what about Justice then, when you say it's 
useful in peace time what is it useful for, what does it produce? contracts Socrates. and by 
contracts do you mean partnerships or something else? I mean Partnerships. all right, is the just 
man a good and useful partner when it comes to playing backgammon, or would someone who plays 
backgammon be more use. someone who plays backgammon would be more use. and when it comes to brick 
laying or building in stone is the just man a more useful and better partner than a builder. of 
course not. well, in what kind of partnership is the just man a better partner than a lyre player 
in the way a lyre player is better at playing the notes. in partnerships involving money I think. 
unless by any chance Polemarchus it's a question of putting the money to some use, if you have to 
buy or sell a horse jointly for a sum of money, in that case I imagine, someone who knows about 
horses is of more use, isn't he? apparently. and for buying or selling a ship you'd want a ship 
builder or ship's captain. so it seems. in what situation then requiring the joint use of silver 
or gold is the just man more useful than anyone else? when there's a need to deposit money and have 
it kept safe. you mean when there's no need to put it to any use, you just want it to stay where it 
is. that's right. so it's when money is useless that Justice is useful for dealing with it. it looks 
like it. and a pruning knife when you want to keep it safe, then Justice is useful both in public 
life and in private life, but when you want to use it then the art of viticulture is what you want. 
apparently. and are you going to say the same about a shield or a lyre that Justice is useful when 
you need to keep them safe and not use them, but that when you do need to use them, then you want 
the solders art and the art of music? I shall have to say that. and in all other examples Justice 
is useless when it comes to using any of them and useful only when they are useless? I suppose so 
he said. though personally I can't any longer remember what I did say, but one thing I do think 
still and that is that Justice is treating your friends well and your enemies badly. by friends 
do you mean the people each individual believes to be good or those who really are good even if 
he doesn't realize it and the same with enemies. in all probability he replied, people will like 
those they think are good and dislike those they think are evil, and do people ever make mistakes in 
this, do they often think people are good when they're not and vice versa. yes they do make mistakes. 
so for these people, are the good their enemies and the bad their friends? they certainly are. 
is it nonetheless right for these people when this happens to treat the wicked well and the good 
badly? it looks like it. and the good are just they're not the kind of people who do wrong? true. 
so according to your argument, it is right to harm those who do no wrong. impossible Socrates. 
it looks as if there's something wrong with the argument. then it must be right I said, to treat 
the unjust badly and the just well. that sounds better. in that case Polemarchus there are many 
people for whom it'll turn out if their judgment of people has been at fault, that it is right to 
treat their friends badly since their friends are evil and their enemies well since their enemies 
are good, in those circumstances we shall end up saying the exact opposite of the definition we 
quoted from Simonides. yes he said it certainly can turn out like that. let's change our definition, 
we're probably not defining friend and enemy correctly. how are we defining them Polemarchus. 
we said that the person who seemed to be good was a friend, and now how do you want to change that 
definition. if someone both seems to be good and is let's call him a friend, if he seems to be but 
isn't really, let's say that he seems to be a friend but isn't really a friend and let the same 
definition apply to an enemy. on this definition it appears the good man will be a friend and the 
one who is no good will be an enemy. yes. do you want us to make an addition to our definition of 
justice, our first definition was that it was just to help a friend and and harm an enemy. do you 
want us now to add to that and say that it is just to help a friend if he is good and harm an enemy 
if he is bad. yes he said I think that would be an excellent definition. but is it really in the 
nature of a just man I asked, to treat anyone in the world badly. it certainly is he said. he should 
treat badly those who are wicked, his enemies. if you treat treat a horse badly, does it become better 
or worse? worse. worse by the standard we use to judge dogs or the standard we use to judge horses. 
the standard we use to judge horses. and dogs the same if you treat them badly they become worse by 
the standard we use to judge dogs not horses? they must do. what about humans my friend, are we to 
say in the the same way that if they are treated badly they become worse by the standard we use to 
judge Human Excellence. certainly. but isn't Justice a form of Human Excellence. again it must be. 
in which case my friend members of the human race who are treated badly must necessarily become more 
unjust. it looks like it. are musicians able by means of music to make people unmusical? no that's 
impossible. can horsemen make people unskilled with horses by means of horsemanship. no. and can the 
just make people unjust by means of Justice, or in general, can the good use Human Excellence to make 
people bad. no that's impossible. yes because it's not the property of heat I assume to make things 
cold, it's the property of its opposite. yes. nor is it the property of dryness to make things wet but 
of its opposite. yes. and it is certainly not the property of good to do harm or treat people badly, 
but of its opposite. apparently. and the just man is good. yes. in that case Polemarchus, it is not 
the property of the just man to treat his friend or anyone else badly, it is the property of his 
opposite the unjust man.

Even in the middle of our conversation Thrasymachus had repeatedly tried to take control of the 
discussion, but each time he had been prevented by those sitting round us who wanted to hear the 
discussion through to the end, but when we reached this stopping place in the argument, he was 
incapable of remaining silent any longer he gathered himself and sprang at us like a wild beast at 
its prey. speaking up loud and clear, Thrasymachus said, what's this nonsense that has got into you 
two Socrates why be so obliging? why keep giving way to one another? if you really want to know what 
Justice is then stop simply asking questions and scoring points by proving that any answer given by 
anyone else is wrong. you know perfectly well it's easier to ask questions than to give answers come 
on, why don't you give some answers yourself, tell us what you say justice is, and don't go telling 
us that it's what's necessary or what what's beneficial or what's advantageous or what's profitable 
or or what's good for you, I won't take any of that stuff no, tell us please quite clearly exactly 
what you mean. don't be angry with us Thrasymachus I said, with some apprehension, if Polemarchus 
and I are making mistakes in our examination of the arguments, I assure you we're not making them on 
purpose if we're looking for gold we wouldn't deliberately give way to one another in our search and 
so destroy our chances of finding it so since what we are actually looking for is Justice, a thing 
more valuable than a large quantity of gold, you can't imagine we are so stupid as to make concessions 
to one another and not be determined to bring it as clearly as possible into view, believe us my friend, 
the trouble is we lack the ability, so when you clever people see our efforts, pity is really a far 
more appropriate reaction than annoyance. this brought an unpleasant laugh from Thrasymachus. oh my 
God he said, I knew it the famous modesty of Socrates, I predicted it, I told these people you'd refuse 
to give any answers that you pretend to be modest that you'd do anything to avoid answering if anyone 
asked you a question. clever of you Thrasymachus, clever enough to know what would happen if you were 
to ask someone what 12 was but then give him a warning before he answered, now look here don't go to 
telling us that 12 is twice 6 or 3 * 4 or 6 * 2 or 4 * 3, I'm not going to take any nonsense of that 
sort from you. it was obvious to you I imagine that if you asked the question in that way no one could 
possibly answer it. is that just what you're going to do now? are you going to give one of the answers 
I told you not to give. it wouldn't surprise me I said, if on reflection I came to that conclusion. 
what if if I give you an answer about Justice which is quite different from all those other answers, a 
much better answer than those what do you think should be your penalty. well obviously the penalty 
appropriate to someone who doesn't know, he should learn I take it from the person who does know. you 
innocent! said Thrasymachus, no, you must do more than learn, you must pay me some money as well. very 
well, as soon as I have any I will. you do have some said Glaucon, if it's money you're worried about 
Thrasymachus, go ahead and speak we will all pay up for Socrates. I'll bet you will he said anything to 
allow Socrates to play his usual trick, not answer the question himself but wait for someone else to 
answer it, and then take what he says and try to prove it wrong. really my dear fellow I said, how could 
anyone answer the question if for a start he didn't know the answer, didn't so much as claim to know it. 
and on top of that even supposing he did have some idea on the subject, if he'd been told by a man of 
some authority not to say any of the things he thought. no it makes much more sense for you to speak, 
you're the one who claims to know the answer and have something to say, so please as a favour tome don't 
keep your answer to yourself, give Glaucon here and the others the benefit of your knowledge. hear it 
then he said, I say that Justice is simply what is good for the stronger. well where's all that praise? 
you're not going to give it, are you? yes I will, as soon as I understand what you mean. at the moment I 
still don't know. what is good for the stronger you say is just, what do you mean by that Thrasymachus, 
if Polydesmus the all-in wrestler is stronger than us, and eating beef is good for building his body, you 
presumably don't mean that this food is also good and right for us who are weaker than him. Socrates you're 
beneath contempt, you're taking what I said in the way which makes it easiest to misrepresent my meaning. 
not at all my friend, but you'll have to tell me more clearly what you mean. all right he said. you must 
be aware that some cities are tyrannies, some are democracies and others aristocracies. of course. and 
what is in control in each city is the ruling power. yes. every ruling power makes laws for its own good: 
a democracy makes democratic laws, a tyranny tyrannical laws and so on. in making these laws they make it 
clear that what is good for them, the rulers is what is just for their subjects, if anyone disobeys, they 
punish him for breaking the law and acting unjustly, that's what I mean, my friend, when I say that in all 
cities the same thing is just, namely what is good for the ruling authority. this I take it is where the 
power lies and the result is for anyone who looks at it in the right way that the same thing is just 
everywhere, what is good for the stronger. now I understand what you mean I said, though whether or not it 
is true remains to be seen. so even your answer Thrasymachus, is that what is good for a person is just 
though that was answer you told me firmly not to give, but you add the qualification for the stronger. a 
trivial addition you may say. that's not yet clear. it may well be an important one. what is clear is that 
we must examine whether what you say is true. like you, I agree that Justice is something that is good for 
a person but while you qualify it as what is good for the stronger, I'm not so sure, we should examine the 
question. go on then, examine it! I shall I said. tell me don't you also say that it is right for subjects 
to obey their rulers. I do. and are they infallible the rulers in all these cities, or are they capable of 
making mistakes? they are certainly I imagine capable of making mistakes. so when they set about enacting 
laws do they enact some correctly but a certain number incorrectly? in my opinion yes. and correctly is 
enacting laws which are in their own interest and incorrectly is enacting laws which are against their own 
interest, is that what you mean? yes. but whatever they enact, their subjects must carry it out and this is 
justice. of course. in that case according to your definition, it is not only just to do what is good for 
the stronger but also its opposite, what is not good for him. what do you mean he said. I mean what you 
mean I think. let's look at it more closely. haven't we agreed that the rulers in giving orders to their 
subjects to do anything, sometimes make mistakes about what is in their own best interest, but that it is 
just for the subjects to carry out whatever orders their rulers give them isn't that what we have agreed? 
yes he said I accept that. then you must also accept I said, that we have agreed it is just to do things 
which are not good for the rulers and the stronger when the rulers inadvertently issue orders which are 
harmful to themselves, and you say it is just for their subjects to carry out the orders of their rulers, 
in that situation most wise Thrasymachus, isn't the inevitable result that it is just to do the exact 
opposite of what you say, after all the weaker have been ordered to do what is not good for the stronger. 
indeed they have Socrates said Polemarchus, no question about it. no question at all Kleitophon interrupted, 
if you're acting as a witness for Socrates. who needs a witness said Polemarchus. Thrasymachus himself 
agreed that rulers sometimes issue orders which are bad for themselves but that it is right for their 
subjects to carry out these orders. yes Polemarchus, because carrying out orders issued by rulers was 
what thus defined as just. yes Kleitophon, but in his definition he also said that what was good for the 
stronger was just, he gave both those definitions and then went on to agree that those who are stronger 
sometimes tell those who are weaker, their subjects, to do what what is bad for them, the stronger. it 
follows from these admissions that what is good for those who are stronger would be no more just than what 
is not good for them. when he talked about what was good for the stronger said Kleitophon, he meant what 
the stronger thought was good for him, this is what the weaker must do and that was his definition of 
justice. those weren't the words he used said Polemarchus. it's neither here nor there Polemarchus I said, 
if those are the words Thrasymachus is using now, let's take it in that sense. tell me Thrasymachus was 
that how you wanted to define justice as what the stronger thinks is good for him whether it really is 
good or not, is that what we should take you to be saying? certainly not he said, do you imagine I regard 
a person who makes a mistake at the moment when he is making the mistake as stronger. that's certainly 
what I thought you meant when you agreed that rulers are not infallible that they sometimes make mistakes. 
you're always trying to trick people Socrates, in the way you argue, I mean, if someone makes a mistake in 
treating the sick, do you call him a doctor by virtue of the actual mistake or an accountant who makes a 
mistake at the precise moment when he is making his mistake by virtue of this mistake, no I think that's 
just the form of words we use, we say the doctor made a mistake, the accountant made a mistake, the teacher 
made a mistake, but the reality I think is that none of them to the extent that he is what we call him ever 
makes a mistake. in precise language since you like speaking precisely, no one who exercises a skill ever 
makes a mistake. so the ruler to the extent that he is a ruler does not make mistakes and since he does not 
make mistakes he does enact what is best for him, and this is what his subject must carry out. so as I said 
originally, my definition is that it is just to do what is good for the stronger. very well Thrasymachus I 
said, so you think I'm a trickster do you? I certainly do. you think I've been asking the questions I have 
been asking with the deliberate intention of winning the argument unfairly. I'm quite sure of it it won't 
do you any good though you can't use unfair arguments without my noticing, and once I notice what you're up 
to you don't have the resources to defeat me in open argument. as if I'd even dream of trying, but since we 
don't want this situation to arise again, could you make one thing clear when you say it is right for the 
weaker to do what is good for the stronger, do you mean the ruler and the stronger in normal usage or in the 
precise sense you were talking about just now. I mean the ruler in the most precise sense possible. tell me 
then, you were talking just now about the doctor in the precise sense, is he a businessman or a healer of 
the sick? and make sure it's the true doctor you're talking about. he's a Healer of the sick. what about a 
ship's captain, is a ship's captain in the correct sense a master of sailors or a sailor? a master of sailors. 
it's not an objection I take it that he sails in the ship, nor is he for that reason to be called a sailor 
since the title ship's captain does not depend on his sailing but on his art or skill and his authority over 
the sailors. true he said. and for each of these is there something which is good for him? yes. doesn't the 
art or skill come into existence for just this reason to seek out and provide what is good for each person. 
yes it does. for each of these skills then, is there anything else which is good for it apart from being a 
as perfect as possible. I don't understand your question. suppose you asked me if it was enough for the 
body to be the body or whether it needed something else, I would reply it certainly does need something 
else that's the reason why the art of medicine has come to be invented, because the body is defective 
and therefore not self-sufficient, so the art of medicine was developed to provide it with the things 
which were good for it. do you think I'd be right in giving that answer or not? yes I think you'd be 
right. what about medicine itself, is that defective? does any art or skill for that matter stand in need 
of some virtue or excellence in the way that eyes need sight and ears need hearing, and sight and hearing 
require an art or skill to preside over them, an art or skill which will think about and provide what is 
good for them, is there any defect in the actual art or skill itself? isn't the art or skill itself in 
the precise sense without fault or blemish if it is correct so long as it is entirely what it is, and 
when you answer, use words in the precise sense you were talking about, is it as I have described or not? 
it is as you have described he said, apparently. in that case I said the art of medicine does not think 
about what is good for the art of medicine but what is good for the body. yes. and horsemanship does not 
think about what is good for horsemanship but what is good for horses. nor does any art or skill think 
about what is good for itself, it has no need to. no. it thinks about what is good for the thing of 
which it is, the art or skill. apparently. but surely thus arts and skills control and have power over 
the objects of which they are the arts and skills. he conceded this though with great reluctance. in 
which case there's no branch or knowledge which thinks about or prescribes what is good for the stronger 
but only what is good for the weaker for what is under its control. he agreed to this too in the end 
though he tried to resist it, and when he did agree I continued. isn't it a fact that no doctor to the 
extent that he is a doctor thinks about or prescribes what is good for the doctor? no. he thinks about 
what is good for the patient, after all it was agreed that a doctor in the precise sense is responsible 
for bodies, he's not a businessman, isn't that what was agreed? Thrasymachus assented. and that the 
ship's captain in the precise sense was in command of sailors not a sailor? yes that was agreed. so a 
ship's captain or commander of this type will not think about or prescribe what is good for the ship's 
captain but what is good for the sailor for the person under his command. he agreed though reluctantly. 
and so Thrasymachus I said, no one in any position of authority to the extent that he is in authority 
thinks about or prescribes what is good for himself but only what is good for the person or thing under 
his authority, for whose benefit he himself exercises his art or skill. everything he says and everything 
he does is said or done with this person or thing in mind, with a view to what is good and appropriate 
for the person or thing under his authority.