Book IX
---
Democracy would seem to be our next object of inquiry, how it arises and what it
is like when it does arise. Isn't the way a city changes from oligarchy to
democracy something like this? Isn't it the result of of their greed in pursuing
the ideal they have set themselves the requirement to become as rich as
possible? How do you mean? Well, the reason the rulers in it are rulers, I take
it, is because of their great wealth. So, if any of the young turn out to have
no self-restraint, the rulers predictably are not prepared to restrain them by a
law, prohibiting them from spending what they own and losing it all. Their aim
is to buy up the property of people like this, or lend them money with the
property as security, and in this way become even richer and more highly
respected. Yes, that is their overriding aim. And isn't it obvious by now in a
city that a high regard for wealth is incompatible with the possession of self-
discipline on the part of the citizens, they will inevitably lose interest in
one or the other? Yes, that's reasonably clear, he said. So, through negligence
and the consistent license, they give well-born individuals to behave without
restraint, the rulers in oligarchies can sometimes drive them into poverty. They
certainly can. And these people I take it, sit around armed in the city in debt
or disfranchised or both, they are the drones with stings, eager for revolution
they hate and plot against those who now possess their property and the others
like them. True. And presumably, the city turns into a democracy when the poor
are victorious, when they kill some of their opponents and send others into
exile, give an equal share in the constitution and public office to those who
remain, and when public office in the city is allocated for the most part by
lot. Yes, he said, that is the way democracy becomes established, whether it
happens by force of arms or because their opponents lose their nerve and go into
exile. Very well then, what will this regime in its turn be like? How will these
people live? Aren't they free men for a start? Isn't it a city full of freedom
and freedom of speech? Isn't there liberty in it for anyone to do anything he
wants? Yes, that's the reputation it has, he said. And where there is liberty,
then obviously each person can arrange his own life within the city in whatever
way pleases him? Obviously. The most varied of regimes I would think as far as
human character goes? Of course. It's probably the most attractive of the
regimes, I said, like a coat of many colours with an infinite variety of floral
decoration, so this regime will catch the eye with its infinite variety of moral
decoration. Lots of people are likely to judge this regime to be the most
attractive, like women or children looking at prettily painted objects. Indeed
they will. There's no compulsion to hold office in this city, I said, even even
if you're well qualified to hold office, nor to obey those who do hold office if
you don't feel like it, nor to go to war when the city is at war, nor to be at
peace when everyone else is, unless peace is what you want. Then again, even if
there's a law stopping you holding office or being a member of a jury, there's
nothing to stop you holding office and being a member of a jury anyway, if
that's how the mood takes you. Isn't this in the short term, a delightful and
heaven scent way of of life? It probably is in the short term. And what about
the relaxed attitude of those sentenced by the courts? Isn't it civilized? Or
have you never seen people who have been condemned to death or exile in a regime
of this sort, who nonetheless remain in person hanging about at the centre of
things and haunting the place, like the spirit of a departed hero without anyone
caring or noticing? I've seen plenty, he said. Then there's the tolerance of
this city, no pedantic insistence on detail but an utter contempt for the things
we showed such respect for when we were founding our city, our claim that only
someone with an outstanding nature could ever turn out to be a good man, and
only if from earliest childhood he played in the best company and the right
surroundings and did all the right kinds of things. How magnificently the city
tramples all this underfoot, paying no attention to what kind of life someone
led before he entered political life, all anyone has to do to win favour is say
he is a friend of the people. Ah yes, that's true nobility. These and related
qualities will be the ones possessed by democracy, you'd expect it to be an
enjoyable kind of regime, anarchic, colourful and granting equality of a sort,
to equals and unequals alike. Yes, that's a pretty familiar story, he said.

In that case, I said, that leaves us with the task of describing the most
delightful of regimes and the most delightful of individuals, tyranny and the
tyrant. It certainly does, he said. Does tyranny arise out of democracy much the
same way as democracy arises out of oligarchy? How do you mean? The thing they
held up as an ideal, I said, the thing which formed the basis of oligarchy was
wealth, wasn't it? Yes. It was the insatiable longing for wealth and the neglect
of everything else in the pursuit of profit which destroyed oligarchy? True, he
said. And is it the insatiable longing for what it defines as good which
destroys democracy too in its turn? What is it you say it defines as good?
Freedom, I said, this is the thing I imagine, which in a democratic state you
will hear described as its finest attribute, and what makes it for any free
spirit, the only place worth living in. Yes, that is certainly something you
often hear said. Well then, as I was saying just now, is it the insatiable
longing for this good and the neglect of everything else, which brings about a
change in this regime too and creates the need for tyranny? How does that
happen, he asked. I imagine it's when a democracy in its thirst for the wine of
freedom finds the wine being poured by unscrupulous cup bearers, and when it
drinks more deeply than it should of pure, unmixed freedom, then if its
magistrates are not totally easygoing and do not offer it that freedom in large
quantities, it accuses them of being filthy oligarchs and punishes them. Yes, he
said, that is what they do. Those who obey the rulers are heaped with insults,
they are regarded as servile nonentities, praise and respect whether in private
or public life, go to rulers for behaving like those they rule and to those they
rule for behaving like rulers. Isn't the desire for freedom in a city of this
type bound to run to extremes? Of course it is. And isn't the anarchy bound to
make its way, my friend, into private households? Can we give an example of
that? A father for example gets used to being like a child and being afraid of
his sons, a son gets used to being like his father, he feels no respect or fear
for his parents, all he wants is to be free. Immigrants are put on a par with
citizens, and citizens with immigrants, and the same with visiting foreigners.
Yes, that's what happens. That plus a few more trivial examples of the same
kind, I said, in a society of this sort, teachers are afraid of their pupils and
carry favour with them, pupils have an equal contempt for their teachers and
their attendants. In general, the the young are the image of their elders and
challenge them in everything they say and do, the old descend to the level of
the young, they pepper everything with wit and humour, trying to be like the
young because they don't want to be thought harsh or dictatorial. Precisely, he
said. But the extreme limit of freedom in a city of this kind comes when those
who have been bought as slaves, whether male or female, are every bit as free as
those who bought them. As for the relationship of women to men and men to women,
I all but forgot to mention the extent of the legal equality and liberty between
them, to generalise from all these collected observations, have you noticed how
sensitive it makes the souls of the citizens so that if anyone seeks to impose
the slightest degree of slavery, they grow angry and cannot tolerate it. In the
end, as I imagine you are aware, they take no notice even of the laws written or
unwritten in their determination that no one shall be master over them in any
way at all. Yes, I'm well aware of that, he said. This is the form of government
my friend, so attractive and so headstrong from which I believe tyranny is born.
Certainly headstrong he said, but what is the next step? We mentioned the class
of idle and extravagant men, the most courageous element leading the least
courageous element following, we compared them to drones, the leaders to drones
with stings, the followers to drones without stings? Rightly so. Very well,
let's make a theoretical division of the democratic city into three parts, after
all, this is how it is in fact composed. This class of drones I imagine is one
part, and because of the absence of restrictions, it grows at least as freely in
a democracy as in an oligarchy. That is so. But it is much fiercer in a
democracy than in an oligarchy. In what way? In an oligarchy, it is treated as
of no value and excluded from power, so it gets no exercise and does not develop
its strength. In a democracy by contrast, barring a few individuals, it is the
dominant influence in the state, the fiercest element in this class does the
talking and acting, the remainder sit around the rostrum buzzing, and refusing
to allow the expression of any other view. The result is that in a regime of
this kind everything with very few exceptions, is run by the class of drones.
Exactly, he said. Then there's a second class which always separates itself off
from the majority. What class is that? When everyone is engaged in making money,
presumably it is those with the most disciplined temperament who generally
become the richest. Very likely. They provide a plentiful supply of honey for
the drones I imagine, and an easy source from which to extract it. Yes, he said,
after all, they can't extract much from those who haven't got much. They're
called the rich, these people we're talking about, the drones feeding ground.
That's about it, he said. The general populace would be the third class, manual
labourers with little interest in politics and very little property of their
own, this is the most numerous and powerful class in a democracy but only when
it is assembled together. It is indeed he said, but if it isn't getting some
share of the honey, it is reluctant to assemble very often. That's why it always
does get a share of it if its leaders have anything to do with it, they take it
away from those who possess property and distribute it among the people, keeping
only the lion's share for themselves. Yes, the people do get a limited share of
that sort, he said. Those whose property is taken away are presumably compelled
to defend themselves by speaking in the assembly and taking whatever other
action they can. Of course. Even if they have no desire at all for revolution,
they are accused by the others of plotting against the people and being
oligarchs. Naturally. In the end, when they see the people attempting to injure
them, not maliciously but out of ignorance, misled by their opponents. At that
point, whether they like it or not, the rich really do become oligarchs though
not from choice. This too is an evil implanted in them by the stings of the
drone we were talking about. It is indeed. Then you get impeachments, litigation
and lawsuits between the two classes. You certainly do. And isn't there a
universal tendency for the people to set up one single individual, who is their
own particular champion? Don't they feed him up and make him mighty? They do. So
when we look at the growth of a tyrant, I said, one thing at least is clear,
this position of champion is the sole route from which the tyrant springs. Yes,
that's absolutely clear. In that case, what prompts the change from champion to
tyrant? Isn't it pretty obvious that it happens when the champion of the people,
starts acting like the character in the story about the temple of Zeus, the wolf
god in Arcadia? What story, he asked? That there is one piece of human innards,
chopped up among all the pieces of the other sacrificial offerings, and that
anyone who tastes it will inevitably, turn into a wolf, or haven't you heard
that story? Yes, I have heard it. Isn't it the same with a champion of the
people, once he really wins the mob over, the blood of his kinsman is no bar to
him, he accuses someone falsely as such people do, he brings him to trial and
murders him, and as he rubs out a man's life, his unholy mouth and lips taste
the blood of a butchered kinsman, he drives people into exile or kills them,
hinting at a cancellation of debts and the redistribution of land. What is the
inevitable and predestined next step for someone like this? Doesn't he either
have to be destroyed by his enemies or else, become tyrant, turning from man
into wolf? Yes, that is absolutely inevitable, he said. He becomes the architect
of civil war against those who own property? He does. Well then, if he's sent
into exile but returns despite his enemies, doesn't he return as an out and out
tyrant? Yes obviously. And if his enemies are unable to drive him into exile or
kill him by attacking him publicly, then they start plotting to kill him
secretly by assassination? Yes, that's certainly what tends to happen, he said.
The tyrant's response to this is the famous request which everyone who has
reached this stage discovers, he asks the people for a personal bodyguard, to
guarantee the safety of their people's champion. Indeed he does. And they give
him one, more worried about his safety than their own presumably? Much more.
Shall we then describe the happiness of this man and of the city where such a
creature comes into being? By all means, let's describe it, he said. Very well,
to start with in the early days, doesn't he have a smile and a friendly word for
everyone he meets, he says he's no tyrant and is full of promises both to
individuals and to the state, won't he have freed them from their debts and
divided up the land, among the people and among his supporters? Doesn't he
pretend to be universally kind and gentle? He's bound to. But I imagine that
once he feels safe from his enemies in exile, being reconciled with some and
destroying others, his first concern is to be constantly starting wars, so that
the people will stand in need of a leader. Very likely. And perhaps with the
further intention that their contributions to the war will impoverish them,
compel them to concentrate on their daily occupations, and make them less likely
to plot against him? Undoubtedly. And if there are some independent-minded
people whom he suspects of challenging his rule, doesn't he try to find a good
excuse for handing them over to the enemy and destroying them? For all these
reasons, isn't a tyrant always bound to be stirring up war? Yes, he is. Doesn't
this tend to make him increasingly unpopular with the citizens? Of course it
does. Then the boldest of those who hope to make him tyrant and who are now in
positions of power, start to speak their minds freely, don't they, both to him
and to one another, criticizing what is going on. Probably. So the tyrant if he
wants to go on ruling, must be prepared to remove all these people, until he is
left with no one who is any use whether friend or enemy. Obviously he must. He
will need a sharp pair of eyes then, he needs to pick out the brave, the noble,
the wise and the rich, since it is his unavoidable good fortune, whether he
likes it or not, to be the enemy of all of them. He must plot their down until
he has got the city clean. A fine way to clean a city, he said. Yes, the exact
opposite of what doctors do to the body, they remove what is worst and leave
what is best. With the tyrant, it is the other way round. That's what he has to
do apparently, if he is to go on ruling. In which case I said, he is firmly and
inevitably impaled on the horns of a delightful dilemma, which requires him
either to spend his life with the worthless mob and be hated by them into the
bargain, or not to live at all. That's about the size of it, he said. And the
more hated by the citizens his behaviour makes him, the larger and more reliable
a bodyguard he will need, won't he? Of course. Who are these reliable people
then, where can he send to for them? They'll come winging their way of their own
accord he said, any number of them as long as he pays the going rate, dogs
teeth, drones again, foreign ones, all kinds of them I think you're talking
about? Good, I haven't given you the wrong impression then. And from the city
itself, might he not bring himself... To do what? To deprive the citizens of
their slaves, set the slaves free and make them part of his bodyguard? Indeed he
might. They are after all the most reliable he can find. What a wonderful thing
you make a tyrant out to be, I said, if these are the people he has as his
friends, the people he can trust, once he has destroyed the friends he started
with. Well these certainly are the kind of friends he has. So, while he enjoys
the admiration of these friends and the company of these new citizens, do decent
people hate him and avoid him? How can they help doing so. We have strayed from
the point however, I said, let's return to that army the tyrant has, that fine,
large, varied and ever-changing army and ask how it is going to be maintained.
Well obviously, if there's money in the city's temples, then as long as it
lasts, he will spend that, plus the money of his victims, allowing him to exact
smaller contributions from the people. But what happens when these run out? He
will use his father's money obviously, to support himself his drinking
companions and his male and female friends. I see, you mean the people who
spawned the tyrant will support him and his friends. It will have no choice, he
said. What if the people resent this, I asked, it is not right they might say
for a start, for a grown-up son to be supported by his father, quite the reverse
in fact, a father should be supported by his son. What is more the reason we
fathered you and put you in power, was not so that we could ourselves become
slaves to our own slaves as soon as you became powerful, and support you and
them and the rest of your collection of human flotsam, we order you to leave the
city now, you and your friends. What do you think would happen then? My god, he
said, then the people really will find out what they are and what kind of
offspring they have fathered, taken to their hearts and allowed to grow. What do
you mean, I asked. Will the tyrant use force against his parent? Will he beat
him if he disobeys? Yes, once he has taken away his weapons. A parricide then
this tyrant you are describing, a cruel guardian for man's old age. At this
point it seems the thing is an acknowledged tyranny, the people have jumped out
of the proverbial frying-pan into the fire, from their enslavement to free men
to a despotism of slaves. Yes, that is how it happens. Will there be any
objection then I asked, to our saying that we have given an adequate description
of the way tyranny evolves out of democracy, and of what it is like when it has
done so? No, he said, our description is perfectly adequate.

This is your moment then, I said, your time has finally come, like the judge of
the contest making the final decision. There are five contenders: the kingly,
the timocratic, the oligarchic, the democratic and the tyrannical. In terms of
happiness, which of them in your opinion comes first? Which comes second and so
on with the other places? That's not a difficult decision, in terms of goodness
and badness and happiness and its opposite, I rank them like choruses in order
of their appearance. Shall we hire a herald then, I asked, or shall I announce
the result myself? The verdict of the son of Ariston is this, the best and most
just character is the happiest, this is the one who is the most kingly, the one
who is king over himself, the worst and most unjust is the unhappiest and he is
in fact the one with the most tyrannical nature, the one who is the greatest
tyrant and over himself and his city. Thank you, he said, let's take it that the
announcement has been made. And shall I add a clause saying whether or not they
escape detection in the sight of all men and gods? Yes, do add that clause. Very
well, I said, let that stand as one proof for us. Now, have a look at this
second proof and see if you think it has any force. How does the proof go? Like
this, the three parts of the soul seem to me to have three forms of pleasure,
one for each individual part, likewise three forms of desire and three forms of
rule. Can you explain that? The first element we say is the one which allows a
man to learn, the second the part which allows him to act in a spirited way, to
the third, on account of its diversity, we found it impossible to give its own
unique name, so we gave it the name of its largest and strongest element. We
called it desiring, because of the strength of its desires for food, drink, sex
and everything that goes with these, and money-loving because money is the
principal means of satisfying these desires. And we were right, he said. So, if
we were to say that the thing it took pleasure and delight in was profit, would
that be our best way of concentrating our argument under one general heading,
would that make it clear to ourselves what we mean when we talk about this part
of the soul, and if we were to call it money loving and profit loving, would we
be justified? Well, I certainly think we would. What about the spirited part?
Can we say by contrast, that its sole and constant aim is power victory and
reputation? Yes, we can. So, if we called it a lover of victory and a lover of
honour, would that be appropriate? Absolutely appropriate. And of course it's
obvious to anyone that the part we learn with is entirely and constantly intent
upon knowing where the truth lies, and that of the three, it is the least
concerned with money and reputation? Easily the least. Would it be in order then
for us to call it a lover of learning and a lover of wisdom? It would. Very
well, I said. Is this the ruling element in some people's souls and is one of
the other two elements, it could be either, dominant in others? Yes, he said.
Does this explain why we say that there are three fundamental human types: the
lover of wisdom, the lover of victory and the lover of profit? Of course. And
three classes of pleasures, one corresponding to each type? Exactly. You
realize, I said, that if you took the trouble to ask three people of this sort
one after another, which of these lives is the most pleasant, each would sing
the loudest praises of his own? Certainly the money maker will say that in
comparison with profit, the pleasures of honour and learning are worthless,
unless there is something in them which can make money? True. What about the
lover of honour, I asked, doesn't he regard the pleasure which depends on money
as sorted and the pleasure which depends on learning except to the extent that
learning brings reputation, as a load of hot air? He does. As for the lover of
wisdom or philosopher, I said, what view do we imagine he takes of the other
pleasures, compared with the pleasure of knowing where the truth lies and always
enjoying some similar sort of pleasure while he is learning it, won't he regard
them as far inferior? And won't he call them truly necessary or compulsory since
but for necessity, he could go on perfectly well without them? Yes, he said, we
can be confident, this is his view. Now think about it, here are three men,
which of them has most experience of all the pleasures we have mentioned? Does
the lover of profit learn about the nature of truth itself? Do you think he has
more experience of the pleasure of knowledge than the lover of wisdom has of the
pleasure of making money? There's no comparison, he said, the lover of wisdom is
compelled to taste both pleasures right from his earliest years, the lover of
profit on the other hand, is not compelled to learn about the nature of things
or taste and experience the sweetness of this pleasure, even if he really wanted
to, he would find it difficult. In which case, I said, when it comes to
experience of both sets of pleasures, the lover of wisdom has a great advantage
over the lover of profit? Yes, a great advantage. And does he have an advantage
over the lover of honour, or does he have less experience of the pleasures of
being respected than the lover of honour has of the pleasure of knowledge? No,
he said, if they accomplish what each individually sets out to achieve, they all
find that recognition follows, the rich man is widely respected, so is the
courageous man and so is the wise man, so they all experience the pleasure of
being respected, they all know what it is like, but only the lover of wisdom,
the philosopher, is in the position of having tasted the contemplation of what
is and the pleasure it brings. On grounds of experience then, I said, he is the
best judge out of these men. Much the best. What is more, won't he be the only
one whose experience has been accompanied by reflection? Of course. And the
instrument with which judgment should be made does not belong to the lover of
profit or the lover of honour, but to the lover of wisdom. What instrument is
that? We said judgment should be made using reasoned arguments, didn't we? Yes.
And reasoning is essentially the instrument of the philosopher, the lover of
wisdom? Of course. If wealth and profit were the best means of deciding
questions, the truest recommendations or criticisms would necessarily be those
of the lover of profit? Necessarily. And if honour and victory and courage were
the best means, wouldn't the truest recommendations be those of the lover of
honour or lover of victory? Obviously. But since experience reflection and
reasoning are the best means, the truest recommendations will necessarily be
those of the lover of wisdom and lover of reasoning, he said, of these three
pleasures then, will the one belonging to the part of the soul with which we
learn be the most enjoyable? And does the person in whom this part rules have
the most enjoyable life? How can he fail to, he said, at the very least he's
certainly giving an expert opinion, the reflective man when he recommends his
own life? Which life does our judge put in second place, and which pleasure? The
pleasure of the warlike lover of honour obviously, it is closer to him than the
pleasure of the money maker. So, he puts the lover of profits pleasure third
apparently? Yes of course, he said. That's two wins out of two then for the just
over the unjust, now we come to the third round. If you think about pleasure,
you can see that for anyone other than the wise, it is not true and pure but a
kind of shadow picture, or so I think I've been told by some expert. Explain
please, why pleasure is a shadow picture? Don't we say that pain is the opposite
of pleasure? We certainly do. And that there is such a thing as feeling neither
pleasure nor pain? Yes. Intermediate between those two, a kind of rest or rest
bit for the soul from pain and pleasure, or isn't that how you would describe
it? That is how I would describe it, he said. Think of the things people who are
ill, say at times when they are ill? What sort of things? That there is no
greater pleasure than good health, but that they hadn't realized it was the
greatest pleasure until they were ill. Yes, I do remember hearing people say
that, he said. And have you heard people in the grip of some agonizing pain
saying that there is no pleasure to compare with relief from agony? Yes, I've
heard that. I expect you can think of plenty of similar painful situations
people find themselves in, where the pleasure they praise most highly, is the
absence of pain, a rest from pain rather than any enjoyment. Yes, at times like
that, maybe rest becomes something pleasant and delightful. So too when someone
stops feeling enjoyment, the rest from pleasure will be painful? Possibly, he
said. In which case, this thing we described just now as intermediate between
the two, this rest or respite will at one time or another be both those things,
both pain and pleasure? Apparently. Is it really possible for something which is
neither of those things to come to be both of them? I don't think so. So it's
not that this rest or respite is pleasant, it seems pleasant beside what is
painful and painful beside what is pleasant. As far as the truth about pleasure
goes, there is nothing sound or reliable in these illusions, it's all sorcery.
That's what the argument suggests at any rate, he said. Well, take a look at
pleasures which are not preceded by pain, I said, I wouldn't want you to think
in this context that it is the nature of pleasure simply to be the cessation of
pain, and of pain simply to be the sensation of pleasure. What sort of pleasures
do you mean, where are they? There are any number of them, I said, but you might
like to think particularly, about the pleasures of smell. You don't have to have
felt pain beforehand, they come out of the blue, they are incredibly powerful,
and when they are over, they leave no pain behind. Absolutely true. We shouldn't
accept then that pure pleasure is a release from pain, or pain a release from
pleasure. No, we shouldn't. However, of the so-called pleasures which reach the
soul through the body, surely the most numerous and powerful are of this type,
some sort of relief from pain? Yes, they are. Very well, and are anticipated
pleasures and pains caused by the expectation of some future relief from pain or
pleasure, of the same nature? They are. Do you know what sort of thing these
pleasures and pains are then, I asked, and what they most resemble? What? Do you
believe the world contains a top, a bottom and something in between? Yes, I do.
Don't you think if someone were taken from the bottom to the middle, he'd be
bound to think he was traveling to the top, and standing in the middle looking
back at where he'd come from, wouldn't he be bound to think he was at the top,
if he hadn't seen the real top? If you ask me, he said, that's exactly what some
would think in that situation. And if he were taken back again I asked, would he
think and think rightly that he was traveling to the bottom? Of course he would.
Would the cause of all this be his not having experienced the true range of top,
middle, and bottom? Obviously. In which case, would it surprise you to find that
people with no knowledge of truth are the same, they have unsound opinions on
all sorts of subjects, and their condition when it comes to pleasure pain and
what is in between, is such that when they move in the direction of what is
painful, their supposition is true, they really are in pain, but when they move
from pain to what is in between, they are firmly convinced they have reached
fulfilment and pleasure, it's like comparing black and grey when you have no
knowledge of white, lacking any knowledge of pleasure, they compare the absence
of pain with pain, and come to the wrong conclusion. What would it surprise me,
he said? Good heavens no. It would surprise me much more if it weren't like
that. Think of it like this, I said, aren't hunger and thirst and things like
that a kind of emptiness, an empty condition of the body? Yes, of course they
are. Aren't ignorance and stupidity likewise an empty condition of the soul?
They certainly are. And how are people filled by taking in food, by gaining
understanding? Of course. Which gives the truer fulfilment, that which is more
something, or that which is less something? Obviously, that which is more
something. Which kinds of thing then do you think have a greater share in pure
being, things like bread, drink, cooked food, and nourishment in general, or the
kind made up of opinion, knowledge, understanding, and in fact the whole of
human excellence? The choice you have to make is this, which do you think is
more something, that which is connected with what is always the same, immortal
and true, itself possessing these qualities, and being found in the context of
things with these qualities, or that which is connected with what is never the
same and mortal, itself possessing those qualities and being found in the
context of things with those qualities? That which is connected with what is
always the same is far superior, he's said. Well, does anything have a greater
share in the being of what is always the same than knowledge does? No. Does
anything have a greater share in truth than knowledge does? Again, no. And if
anything has a smaller share in truth, doesn't it also have a smaller share in
being? Necessarily. As a general rule then, will the kinds of things involved in
care of the body have a smaller share, both of truth and of being than the kinds
involved in care of the soul? Much smaller. And don't you think the body itself
has a smaller share than the soul has? Yes, I do. Very well, is what is filled
with things which have more being, and itself has more being more genuinely
filled than what is filled with things which have less being, and itself has
less being? Of course. So, if being filled with things appropriate to our nature
is pleasurable, then that which is more genuinely filled and filled with things
which have more being, would make people more truly and genuinely happy, giving
them true pleasure. Whereas that which takes in things which have less being,
would be less truly and lastingly filled and get hold of a pleasure which was
less trustworthy and less true. That inescapably follows, he said. If the entire
soul then, follows without rebellion, the part which loves wisdom, the result is
that each part can in general, carry out its own functions can be just in other
words. And in particular, each is able to enjoy pleasures which are its own, the
best, and as far as possible, the truest. Absolutely. When one of the other
parts takes control, there are two results, it fails to discover its own proper
pleasure, and it compels the other parts to pursue a pleasure which is not their
own and not true. That's right, he said. Would this result be most noticeable
with those elements, which are furthest removed from philosophy and reason? Yes,
easily the most. And isn't the element furthest removed from reason, the one
which is furthest removed from law and order? Obviously. Wasn't it the lustful
and tyrannical desires which were clearly revealed to be the furthest removed?
Much the furthest. And the kingly and order desires which were the least far
removed? Yes. In which case I imagine, the tyrant will be furthest removed from
true pleasure, his own proper pleasure, while the king will be least far
removed? Bound to be. So, the most unpleasant life, I said, will be the tyrants
and the most pleasant, will be the kings. Absolutely bound to be. And if the
good and just man is so far ahead of the bad and unjust in terms of pleasure,
won't he be an unbelievable distance ahead of him in the grace, beauty and
excellence of his life? Yes, an unbelievable distance. A great prize is at
stake, Glaucon, greater than people realize for being good rather than bad, we
shouldn't be led by success, money, power or even poetry into neglecting
justice, or virtue in general. After what we've said today, I agree, so would
anyone else I imagine. And that's without even mentioning the greatest of the
rewards and prizes which are on offer for virtue. Greater than we can imagine
you must mean, if there are other awards greater than the ones we've described?
Nothing great can happen in a short space of time, I said, and presumably
compared with eternity, our whole span of time from childhood to old age is a
short space of time. A mere nothing, he said. Well then, do you think something
which is immortal, should be seriously interested in this short period of time
and not in the whole of time? No, I think he should be interested in the whole
of time, what are you getting at? This, that the soul is something immortal, is
a conclusion we might be driven to, both by this recent argument and by other
arguments, but if we want to know what it's really like, we shouldn't look at it
in the form we currently see it in, crippled by its partnership with the body
and other evils, no, Glaucon, we should be looking in a different direction.
Which direction, he said? We should look to the soul's love of wisdom, we should
bear in mind what it clings to, the kind of company it yearns for, since it is
kin to that which is divine, immortal and always existing, and what it could
become if it devoted itself entirely to this, then you would see the soul's true
nature, whether it is complex or simple, or however exactly it is. For the
moment however, I think we have given an adequate description of the things that
can happen to it, the shapes it can assume in human life. We certainly have, he
said. There you are then, I said, in the course of our discussion we have
removed the various objections to our claim, we haven't had to resort to the
rewards and reputation of justice, as you were saying, Homer and Hesiod did.
Haven't we found that the thing itself, justice is best for the soul itself and
that the soul should do what is just, whether or not it possesses the Ring of
Gyges, or even the Ring of Gyges and the Cap of Hades. Very true, we have. In
which case, Glaucon, can there still be any objection to our going further, and
restoring to justice and the rest of virtue, the great rewards which they
characteristically bring to the soul during a man's lifetime? No, no objection,
he said. But these are nothing, I said, in number or magnitude when compared
with the rewards and punishments, which await the just and the unjust after
death. You ought to hear those too if each is to receive in full the payment the
argument owes him. Please tell us, he said, I can think a few things I'd rather
hear about.