Plato the Republic

Book X
---
Well, it's not the tale of an ancient mariner I'm going to tell you, more the
tale of an ancient foreigner. A hero from Pamphylia, Er the son of Armenius, he
was killed in battle, and on the 10th day, when the dead by now decomposed were
taken up for burial, his body was found to be perfectly sound. He was taken
home, and on the 12th day, as he was lying on the funeral pyre ready for burial,
he came to life again. And having come to life, he told people what he had seen
in the place where he had been.

He said that when his soul left his body, it went on a journey with many others
like it, until they came to a wonderful place where there were two openings side
by side in the ground and two others up above in the heavens corresponding to
these. In between were seated judges who, when they gave their judgments,
ordered the just to take the way which led to the right and upwards through the
heavens, and to wear on their front the marks of the judgments made about them.
The unjust they ordered to take the left-hand downward way, and they too wore on
their backs the marks of everything they had done. When he himself stepped
forward, they said they wanted him to act as a messenger to mankind, to tell
them what was going on there. They urged him to hear and observe everything
which happened in that place, there he saw souls departing as judgment was
passed on them through the two exits, the opening in the heavens and the opening
in the ground. Meanwhile through the other two openings, souls were either
rising up, parched and dusty in appearance from the one in the ground, or coming
down all clean from the one in the heavens. The ones who were just arriving
looked as if they had got there after a long journey, they were very glad to
come out into the meadow and camp there, as if they were at a festival. They
greeted one another those who were acquainted and exchanged news, those coming
out of the ground asked the others about things up there, while those coming
from the heavens asked them in return how things were where they had been. As
they exchanged accounts, the first group were wailing and weeping as they
recalled all the terrible things they had seen and experienced in their journey,
their thousand-year journey beneath the earth. Those who had come from the
heavens by contrast, were recounting the wonderful things that had happened to
them and the indescribably beautiful sights they had seen.

To give a full account, Glaucon, would take a very long time but the main point
he said was this, whatever wrongs they had done anyone and whatever people they
had all wronged for all these in turn they had to pay a penalty, 10 times over
for each offence, 10 periods of a 100 years each in other words, this being the
measure of a human life. This made sure they would pay a tenfold payment for the
offence. For example, if any of them had been guilty of the deaths of many
people, betraying cities or armies and casting people into slavery perhaps, or
playing a part in any other cruelty, on all these counts, they earned tenfold
pain for each offence. Equally, due rewards were earned for any good deeds and
for showing themselves just and holy. And he said something though nothing of
note about those who died at birth or lived only a short time, he also described
the still greater rewards and penalties for piety or impiety towards gods and
parents and for murder. He said he came across one person who is being asked by
another, where Ardiaeus the Great was, this Ardiaeus had been tyrant in some
city in Pamphylia a thousand years before. He had killed his aged father and his
older brother and done many other wicked deeds, so it was said. He has not come
to this place, replied the one being asked, nor will he ever come. That was one
of the appalling sights we saw. When we had been through everything we had to go
through and were close to the opening, just about to come up, we suddenly caught
sight of Ardiaeus and some others. They were tyrants most of them, though there
were some private citizens who had committed heinous crimes. When these people
thought it was their turn to go up, the opening refused to allow them through.
Its mouth gave a loud roar whenever one of these irredeemably wicked people and
said they were going to be thrown into Tartarus. He said that for each of them,
out of the whole range of fears they were exposed to in that place, this was the
greatest, that when they came up to the opening, the sound might be heard. And
each of them was only too glad to pass through in silence.

So much then for the kinds of penalties and punishments and the corresponding
rewards. For each group, the stay in the meadow lasted seven days, at the end of
it on the eighth day, they had to get up and go on a journey, arriving after 4
days at a place from which they could see a shaft of light like a pillar,
extending from above through the whole heaven and earth, the light was more like
a rainbow than anything else, only brighter and more pure. A day's journey
brought them to where the light was, and there in the middle of the light, they
could see extended from heaven the extremities of its chains. This light binds
the heavens. It's like the cables of a trireme in the way it holds the whole
revolving firmament together. And from the extremities, they saw extended the
Spindle of Necessity, by which all the separate rotations are set in motion. The
shaft and hook of the spindle are of adamant, the whorl is partly of adamant and
partly of other materials. The nature of the whorl is as follows: in appearance
it is like the whorls we have here, but from what he said, we have to think of
it like this. Imagine a single large whorl, which has been completely hollowed
out with a chisel, and a second smaller whorl inside it, fitting exactly into it
like those pots that fit inside one another. Similarly, a third, fourth, and
then four more, making a total of eight whorls in all, one inside another. Their
rims show as so many circles from above and form a single whorl around the shaft
with a continuous surface. The shaft is driven right through the middle of the
eighth whorl. The first and outermost whorl is the broadest in terms of the
breadth of the circular rim. The rim of the sixth comes second, the fourth rim
comes third, the eighth rim comes fourth, the seventh rim comes fifth, the fifth
rim comes sixth, the third rim comes seventh, and the second comes eighth, the
rim of the largest whorl is spangled, that of the seventh is the brightest, that
of the eighth derives its colour from the seventh shining on it, the second and
fifth are very similar to one another and yellower than the others, the third
has the whitest light, the fourth is reddish, and the sixth is the next whitest
after the third. The spindle is rotating, seen as a whole it all goes round at
the same speed but within the hole as it revolves, the seven inner circles are
gently revolving in the opposite direction to the hole. Of these inner circles,
number eight turns fastest followed by numbers seven, six and five, which all
travel at the same speed. Third in the speed of its counter rotation as it
appeared to them, was the fourth whorl. Fourth was number three, and fifth
number two. The spindle itself turns in the lap of necessity, on the rim of each
of its circles is perched a siren, who is carried around with it, uttering a
single sound, a single musical note. All eight together combined to produce one
single harmony. There are three others seated in a circle at equal distances,
each on a throne. These are the Fates, the daughters of Necessity: Lachesis,
Clotho and Atropos. They are clothed in white with garlands on their heads, and
they sing to the accompaniment of the Sirens. Lachesis sings of the past, Clotho
of the present, and Atropos of the future. Clotho has her right hand on the
outer circumference of the spindle, turning it at intervals. Atropos with her
left hand does the same for the inner rims. Lachesis touches both inner and
outer in turn, one with each hand. They themselves, when they arrived, had
immediately to go before Lachesis, a kind of prophet or speaker started off by
lining them up, then from the lap of Lachesis he took numbers for drawing lots
and patterns of lives. Ascending a high platform, he began to speak, the word of
the maiden Lachesis, daughter of Necessity, souls, creatures of a day, here
begins another cycle of mortal life and the death it brings. Your guardian
spirit will not be given to you by lot; you will choose a guardian spirit for
yourselves. Let the one who draws the first lot be the first to choose a life;
he will then be joined to do it by necessity. Virtue knows no master, your
respect or contempt for it will give each of you a greater or smaller share. The
choice makes you responsible, god is not responsible. With these words, he threw
the lots among them all, and each picked up the lot which fell closest to him.
All except Er, he was not allowed to pick one up but anyone who did pick one up,
could see clearly what number lot he had drawn. Next he spread the patterns of
lives before them on the ground, there were many more of them than there were
people present and they were of every possible kind, lives of all the animals in
addition to all the human lives. There were lives of tyrants among them, some
lasting, others destroyed in mid-career and ending in poverty and exile, or
beggary. There were lives of men distinguished some for their looks, beauty and
in general, for their strength and prowess; others for their families and the
virtues of their ancestors. Lives of men who by the same criteria were not
distinguished and a similar range of women's lives as well. The overall
disposition of the soul was not part of the life because the soul is affected by
the kind of life it chooses, but the other characteristics were mingled with one
another, with wealth and poverty, disease and health, or with some balance
between these extremes.

It looks my dear Glaucon, as if that is where the whole danger lies for a man,
it is why the greatest care must be directed towards having each and every one
of us, disregard all other branches of study and be a follower and student of
this branch of ours, in the hope that he can find and discover someone who will
give him the ability and knowledge to distinguish the good life from the bad and
choose always and everywhere out of all those possible, the life which is
better. He must take into consideration all the things we have talked about here
today, comparing them with one another and choosing between them in terms of
excellence of life. He needs to know what the effect is for good or bad, of
beauty when mingled with poverty or riches. And what the effect is of noble or
ignoble birth, of private life or public office, of strength or weakness, of
ease or difficulty of learning, and all such matters as are connected with the
soul either by nature or acquisition when they are all mingled with one another.
Taking all these things into consideration, he must be able to choose, defining
the worse and better life with reference to the nature of the soul, calling that
worse, which leads the soul along the road to greater injustice, and that
better, which leads along the road to greater justice. He will pay no attention
to anything else, after all, this is the crucial choice as we have seen, both
during his lifetime and after his death, fast as adamant must he hold to this
opinion as he goes to Hades, so that even there he can avoid being distracted by
evils like wealth, and so plunging into the sort of behaviour, tyranny in
particular, which will make him commit countless crimes for which there is no
remedy, and suffer an even worse fate himself. No, he will know how to choose
the middle way in such matters, avoiding the two extremes both in this life as
far as he can, and in the whole of the life hereafter, this is the way to the
greatest happiness for a man.

The next thing the speaker had to say according to this messenger from the
afterworld was this, even the last to come forward, provided he chooses sensibly
and lives with integrity, has a worthwhile life before him, not a bad life,
there is no cause for carelessness if you choose first, no cause for despair if
you choose last. When he finished speaking, the person who had drawn the first
lot came straight up and chose the greatest tyranny, in his folly and greed, he
did not look hard enough at what he was choosing, he had not seen that within
its fate was included among other evils, the devouring of his own children. When
he did have time to look at it, he beat his breast and lamented his choice in
defiance of the instructions the speaker had issued earlier. He didn't blame
himself for his misfortunes he blamed fate, the gods, anything rather than
himself, he was one of those who had come from the heavens and in his previous
life, he had lived in a well-ordered society, he had had his share of virtue but
it had been a matter of habit rather than philosophy. Generally speaking, the
bulk of those caught in this kind of predicament were those who had come from
heaven, since they were without the experience of hardship. Most of those who
came from the earth having both suffered themselves and seen others suffer, were
in no hurry to make their choice. For this reason and because of the way the lot
fell out, for the majority of the souls, there was an alternation between good
and evil. However, if there is anyone who every time he enters this life here
consistently pursues philosophy in the right way, then provided the way the lot
falls out does not put him among the last to choose, the chances are, if Er's
report is correct, not only that he will be happy here, but also that his
journey from here to there and back again, will be along the smooth heavenly
road, not the rough terrestrial one. This choice of lives among the various
souls, Er said, was a sight well worth seeing, and one which commanded pity,
laughter, and amazement. For the most part, their choice matched the character
and habits of their previous life. He saw the soul of what had once been Orpheus
choose the life of a swan. His death at the hands of women had given him a
hatred of the female sex, and he refused to be conceived and born of a woman
again. He saw the soul of Thamyras choose the life of a nightingale. He saw a
swan choose a human life by way of a change and the same with other musical
creatures. The soul which drew number 20 in the lottery chose the life of a
lion. This was the soul of Ajax, the son of Telamon, shunning the life of a man
as he remembered the decision over the weapons. The one after him was the soul
of Agamemnon. Because of what had happened to it, this soul too had a hatred of
the human race; it chose the life of an eagle instead. The soul of Atalanta had
drawn a number somewhere in the middle. When she saw the wonderful prizes of a
man who was an athlete, she couldn't resist them and chose those. And after her,
he saw the soul of Epeius, the son of Panopeus, taking on the nature of a woman
skilled in the arts. Among the very last to choose, he saw the soul of that
clown Thersites taking the form of a monkey. He also saw the soul of Odysseus,
which as it turned out had drawn the last lot of all, coming up to make its
choice. Remembering the hardships of its previous life, it rejected ambition and
spent a long time wandering around looking for the life of a private citizen who
minded his own business. After a long search, he found one lying somewhere; it
had been rejected by everyone else, when he saw it, he chose it gladly, saying
he would have done the same even if he had drawn the first lot. Similarly, among
the wild animals that were moved into human beings and into one another, the
unjust changing into savage creatures, the just into gentle ones, every kind of
intermingling was taking place.

When all the souls had chosen their lives, they approached Lachesis in the same
order they had made their choices. She gave each the guardian spirit it had
chosen, to go with it, watch over its life, and fulfil its choices. This spirit
first brought the soul before Clotho, passing beneath her hand and the whorl of
the revolving spindle to confirm the fate which the lot had allowed it to
choose. When the soul had touched her, the spirit took it to where Atropos was
spinning, so making the spun thread impossible to unwind. And from there,
without turning back, it went beneath the Throne of Necessity. When it had been
under that, and when the other souls had passed through as well, they all
traveled to the Plain of Forgetting through terrible, stifling heat, since the
plane is devoid of trees or anything else the earth brings forth. By now it was
getting to be evening, so they camped by the River of Lost Cares, whose water no
vessel can hold. Drinking a limited amount of the water was compulsory for all
of them, but those who were not saved by reason, drank more than a limited
amount. And as each drank, he forgot everything he had seen. They went to sleep,
and around the middle of the night there was a thunderstorm and an earthquake,
and they were suddenly carried away from there upwards to their births, all in
different directions like shooting stars. Er himself was not allowed to drink
any of the water. As for where and how he returned to his body, he didn't know.
All of a sudden, he woke up and found himself early in the morning lying on his
funeral pyre. In this way, Glaucon, his story was saved and not lost, and so it
can be our salvation. Since if we believe it, we shall pass the River of
Forgetting in the right way without polluting our souls. And if we take my
advice, we shall believe that the soul is immortal and capable of coping with
all evils and all goods, and we shall keep always to the upper way, doing
whatever we can to practice justice with wisdom. That way we shall be friends to
ourselves and to the gods, both while we remain here and when we carry off our
prizes afterwards, like winning athletes on their victory tour. And so, here and
on the thousand-year journey we have described, let us fare well~