Plato, The Republic

Book III
---
Very well then, I said, what is the next question we have to decide? Isn't it
which of these people are to rule and which be ruled? Unquestionably. Is it
obvious the rulers should be older and those who are ruled younger? Yes it is.
And that the rulers should be the best among them? That too. Among farmers,
aren't the best ones the ones who most possess the attributes of a farmer? Yes.
So in this context, since we are looking for the best of the guardians, must
they not be the ones who most possess the attributes of a guardian of the city?
Yes. And for this purpose, do they have to be wise, powerful and above all,
devoted to the city? They do. And people are most devoted to whatever it is they
love? Bound to be. And they love most what they believe to have the same
interests as themselves, the thing whose success or failure they think results
in their own success or failure? True, he said. Then we must select from the
guardians the kind of men who, on examination, strike us most strongly their
whole lives through as being utterly determined to do what is in the city's
interests, and as refusing to act in any way against its interests. Yes, they
should be the people we want. I think we should observe them at all ages to make
sure they are the guardians and defenders of this belief, and that neither magic
nor force can make them forget and jettison their conviction that they should do
what is best for the city. What do you mean by this jettisoning? He asked. I'll
tell you, I said. I think our minds can lose a belief either with or without our
consent, with our consent when it's a false belief and we learn better, without
our consent in the case of all true belief. I understand the loss which is with
our consent but the loss which is without our consent, I need to have it
explained to me. Really? Don't you agree with me that what is good can be taken
away from people only without their consent, whereas what is bad is taken away
with their consent. Isn't being deceived about the truth something bad, and
knowing the truth something good? And don't you think that having a belief which
agrees with the way things are is knowing the truth? You're right, when people
lose a true belief, it is without their consent. And is that a question of theft
or magic or force? Once again I'm afraid, I don't see what you mean. I seem to
be making myself about as clear as a tragic poet, I said. By theft I mean,
people who are talked into changing their minds and people who forget, either
the passage of time or some process of argument takes away their belief without
them realizing it, you do see what I mean now, I hope. Yes. By force I mean,
those whom pain or grief causes to change their beliefs. Yes, I understand that
as well, he said, and I agree. As for magic, you would also accept, I imagine,
that there are people whose beliefs change because they are seduced by pleasure,
or because there is something they are afraid of. Yes, all the things which
deceive us do look like a form of magic. So, as I said just now, we must look
for those who are the best defenders of their conviction, that in any situation,
they must do what they think is in the city's best interests for them to do.
From their earliest childhood, we must watch them and set them the kind of tasks
which can make them lose sight of this aim and lead them astray. Then, we must
choose the ones who remember their aim and are not easily led astray, those who
are led astray, we must reject, mustn't we? Yes. As a second type of test, we
must give them hardship, pain and trials and in all of them, look for the
characteristics we want. Correct, he said. Then we must have a third type of
test, a test for magic and watch their reactions to that, just like people
taking young cubs, close to loud and confused noises to find out if they are
easily frightened, we must expose our guardians when they are young, first to
danger and then to pleasure. We must test them like gold in the fire, only more
so. Does this one stand out in every situation as immune to magic and worthy of
respect, is he a good guardian of himself and the musical education he has
received? Does he show qualities of rhythm and harmony in all the tests we set
him? Is he the kind of person who would be the greatest use to himself and the
city? From our children, from our young and grown men, the one who under
constant testing emerges as pure, is the one who should be appointed as a ruler
and guardian of our city. We should heap honours on him in life and in death,
and when it comes to burial and other memorials, he should receive the greatest
tributes. The one who fails the tests, we should reject. Well, Glaucon, so much
for my views on the selection and appointment of the rulers and guardians, it's
only a general outline of course, and not a precise specification. I think my
views are pretty much the same as yours, he said. In that case, aren't these
really the people who can most accurately be called full guardians, making sure
friends within do not want to harm it and enemies without are not able to harm
it, the young people whom we have been calling guardians up to now we can call
auxiliaries, the defenders of the ruler beliefs. I agree. In that case, I said,
how can we contrive to use one of those necessary falsehoods, we want one single
noble lie which will be believed by everybody, including the rulers ideally, but
failing that, the rest of the city.

What kind of thing do you mean? A very familiar story of Phoenician origin. In
the past, so the poets tell us and we believe, it happened in several places.
But it has not happened in our time and I don't even know if it could happen,
people would take a lot of persuading. You seem a bit reluctant to tell your
story, he said. With good reason, as you will see when I do tell you. Don't
worry, he said, tell it! Very well, I will, though I don't know how I shall have
the nerve or find the right words. I have to try and persuade, first of all the
rulers themselves and the soldiers, and then the rest of the city, that the
entire upbringing and education we gave them, their whole experience of it
happening to them was, after all, merely a dream, something they imagined. And
that in reality, they spent that time being formed and raised deep within the
earth, themselves, their weapons and the rest of the equipment which was made
for them. When the process of making them was complete, the earth, their mother,
released them. And now it is their duty to be responsible for defending the
country in which they live against attack, just as they would defend their
mother or nurse, and to regard the rest of the citizens as their brothers born
from the earth. No wonder you were so embarrassed about telling us your lie.
Yes, I had good reason, I said. But you must listen to the second half of the
story as well. You are all brothers, our story will tell them, all of you in the
city but when god made you, he used a mixture of gold in the creation of those
of you who were fit to be rulers, which is why they are the most valuable. He
used silver for those who were to be auxiliaries, and iron and bronze for the
farmers and the rest of the skilled workers. Most of the time, you will father
children of the same type as yourselves, but because you are all related,
occasionally, a silver child may be born from a golden parent, or a golden child
from a silver parent and likewise, any type from any other type. The first and
most important instruction god gives the rulers is that the thing they should be
the best guardians of, the thing they should keep the most careful eye on, is
the compound of these metals in the souls of the children. If their own child is
born with a mixture of bronze or iron in him, they must feel no kind of pity for
him but give him the position in his society his nature deserves, driving him
out to join the skilled workers or farmers. On the other hand, any children from
those groups born with a mixture of gold or silver, should be given recognition
and promoted either to the position of guardian or to that of auxiliary. There
is a prophecy god tells them, that the end of the city will come when iron or
bronze becomes its guardian. Well, that's the story, can you think of any
possible way of getting people to believe it? No, he said, not the actual people
you tell it to, but their children might, and their children after them, and the
rest of the population in later generations. Even that might help them to care
more about the city and one another. I think I see what you're getting at.
Anyway, let that turn out as popular belief and tradition will have it, our job
now is to arm these earthborn warriors of ours and lead them forth with the
rulers at their head. Let them go and look for the best place in the city to put
their camp, a place from which they can most easily control their own citizens
if any of them refuse to obey the laws or repel any external threats, in the
event of some enemy coming down on them, like a wolf on the fold. When they have
set up their camp, they can sacrifice to the appropriate gods, and then organize
their sleeping accommodation. Does that sound right? Yes, he said. Should it be
the kind of accommodation which will give them adequate shelter both in winter
and summer? Of course. This is their home you're talking about, I take it? Yes,
I said. But a home fit for soldiers not for businessmen. What is the difference
in your view? I'll try and tell you. When shepherds are breeding dogs as
protectors of their flocks, the worst possible disaster and disgrace I imagine,
is to breed dogs whose nature and training are such that lack of discipline,
hunger or some fault of character leads them to try to attack the sheep
themselves and start behaving like wolves instead of dogs. Yes, of course,
that's a disaster. In that case, we must guard in every way we can against our
auxiliaries doing the same sort of thing to the citizens. After all, they are
stronger than the citizens, we don't want them behaving like savage masters
instead of friendly allies. Yes, we must guard against that, he said. Won't the
best insurance against this be for them to have received a really good
education? But they have received one, he said. And I said, we can't be sure of
that, my dear Glaucon. What we can be sure about is what we have just been
saying, which is that when it comes to gentleness both to themselves and to
those under their protection, then the right education, whatever that may be, is
the key. Yes, we're right to be sure of that. In addition to this education, an
intelligent observer may say, the guardian should be furnished with housing and a
general standard of living which will not hinder them from becoming the best
possible guardians, and which will give them no encouragement to do wrong in
their dealings with the rest of the citizens. He may say that and he'll be quite
right. Well then, I said, do you agree with some suggestions about the way they
should live and be housed if this is what we want them to be like? In the first
place, no one is to have any private property beyond what is absolutely
essential. Secondly, no one is to have the kind of house or storeroom, which
cannot be entered by anyone who feels like it. For their subsistence which
should meet the needs of self-disciplined and courageous warrior athletes, they
should impose a levy on the rest of the citizens and receive an annual payment
for their role as guardians, which leaves them with neither a surplus, nor a
deficiency. They should live a communal life, eating together like soldiers in
camp. As for gold and silver, they should be told they already have in their
souls all the time, the divine gold and silver, given to them by the gods. They
have no need of human gold in addition, and it is sacrilege to contaminate the
divine gold they possess by adding to it a mixture of the perishable gold, since
the gold in circulation among ordinary people has been the cause of much evil,
whereas their own gold is pure. To them alone out of the city's population, is
it forbidden to handle or touch gold or silver or be beneath the same roof or
wear it as jewellery, or drink from gold or silver cups. In this way, they will
be kept safe and they will keep the city safe, once they start acquiring their
own land, houses and money, they will have become householders and farmers
instead of guardians. From being the allies of the other citizens, they will
turn into hostile masters, they will spend their whole lives hating and being
hated, plotting and being plotted against. Their fears of enemies inside the
city will be much more numerous and more acute than their fears of enemies
outside the city. Both they themselves and the city will be heading at full
speed towards imminent destruction. For all these reasons, shall we say that our
guardians are to be provided with the housing and way of life we have described?
Are these the laws we should enact, or not? They certainly are, said Glaucon.