Book VIII
---
Very well Glaucon, the agreed characteristics of the city which is to reach the
peak of political organization, are community of women, community of children
and the whole system of education, community likewise of everyday life both in
wartime and peace time, and the kingship of those among them who have developed
into the best philosophers, and the best when it comes to war. Yes, he said,
those are the agreed characteristics. What is more, we also agreed that when the
rulers assume power, they will take the soldiers and move them to housing of the
kind we described earlier, common to all of them and offering no private
property to anyone. And in addition to the nature of their housing, we even
reached agreement if you recall, on the kind of possessions they will have. I do
recall, we thought that none of them should have any of the possessions which
most people nowadays have, they should be guardians and warrior athletes of some
sort, receiving from the rest of the citizens as annual pay for their
guardianship, just as much maintenance as they need for this purpose. Their duty
would be to protect themselves and the rest of the city. You're right, I said,
but after we'd finished dealing with all that, can we remember the point where
we began this digression so that we can carry on from the same place? That's
easy enough, he said, you were talking in pretty much the way you're talking
now, as if you had completed your account of the city. You were saying you
regarded the kind of city you had just described and the individual who
resembled it as a good one, despite the fact that you apparently, had an even
better city and individual to tell us about. You certainly said that if this was
the right sort of city, then the others must have something wrong with them. And
you said if I remember rightly, that there were four other kinds of regime, or
four others were worthy of discussion at any rate. You said we should look at
their faults and at the individuals who resemble them, so that when we had
examined all the individuals and reached agreement on which was the best and
which was the worst, we could ask whether the best individual is the happiest,
and the worst the most wretched, or whether that's all a mistake. I asked you
which four regimes you meant but then Polemarchus and Adeimantus interrupted,
and that started you on the discussion which has brought you here. What an
excellent memory. In that case, try and give me the answer you were going to
give me then. Certainly, I said, assuming I can, that is. Apart from anything
else, I have reasons of my own for wanting to know which four regimes you meant,
there will be no difficulty in telling you that, they even have names, the ones
I'm talking about. There's the one which is pretty generally approved, the
Cretan or Spartan, next and next in the scale of general approval, is the one
called oligarchy, a form of government filled with all sorts of evils. In
contrast to oligarchy and the form of government which in turn arises out of it,
is democracy. And then, there is the wonderful institution of tyranny, standing
head and shoulders above all the others, the fourth and last diseased state of
the city. Can you think of any other kind of regime which forms a distinct
category of its own? I take it that hereditary rule by families, kingships which
go to the highest bidder and other similar regimes, which you will find are no
less common among the barbarians than among the Greeks, are all intermediate
between the forms I have mentioned? Yes, he said, we certainly do hear about
plenty of extraordinary regimes. Well then, are you aware that for individuals
also, there must necessarily be as many kinds of character as there are kinds of
regime? Or do you think that regime somehow come into being from oak or stone?
Isn't it rather from the characters of people in the city which tip the scale as
it were, taking the rest with them? No, I think it's entirely the character of
the inhabitants. In which case, if there are five types of city, then for
individuals there will likewise be, five dispositions of the soul. Of course.
Well, we have finished describing the person who resembles aristocracy, and we
say quite rightly that he is good and just? Yes, we have described him. Is the
next thing then to describe the ones who are less good, the lover of victory and
honour who corresponds to the Spartan regime, and then in turn the oligarchic
character, the democratic and the tyrannical. That way we can contrast the most
unjust when we find him, with the most just. Our investigation into how pure
justice fares, relative to pure injustice in terms of the happiness or
wretchedness of the person who possesses it, will be complete. And we can either
follow Thrasymachus' advice and pursue injustice, or follow the argument which
is unfolding before us now and pursue justice. Yes, he said, that's exactly what
we have to do. All right then, shall we start by taking a look at the honour
loving regime timocracy or timokratia, followed by oligarchy. After that we can
turn to democracy, and fourthly we can turn to the city which is ruled by a
tyrant and look at that. Will that be a way of trying to become competent judges
of the question we have asked ourselves? It would certainly be a logical way of
going about our observations and judgments. Very well, let's try and describe
the way in which timocracy might arise out of aristocracy. Is it a general rule
that the cause of change in any regime is to be found in the sovereign body
itself, when civil war arises within this group? That as long as this group
however small it may be, remains united it is impossible for the regime to be
altered? Yes, that's true. In that case Glaucon, how will the regime of our city
be altered? How will civil war break out either between our auxiliaries and our
rulers or among them? Do you want us, like Homer, to invoke the muses, to tell
us how first dissension fell upon them? Shall we imagine that they speak to us
in high flown tragic tones, as if they were playing with little children, and
teasing them by pretending to be speaking seriously? What would they say?
Something like this, it is no easy matter for a city founded in this way to be
altered, but since destruction awaits everything that has come to be, even a
foundation of this kind will not survive for the whole of time, it will fall
apart, and this will be the manner of its falling. Both for plants in the ground
and for animals above the ground, it is a fact that souls and bodies are
produced or not produced when the cycles of begetting for each species complete
their revolutions, short revolutions for short-lived species and the opposite
for long-lived species. In the case of your species, wise though the people you
have educated as leaders of the city are, still they will not quite hit the mark
when they apply calculation, together with observation to their program of
breeding and birth control, success will elude them, and they will sometimes
produce children they should not produce. When your guardians make injudicious
unions of brides and grooms, the children will not have the right nature and
they will not be fortunate. The previous generation will select the best of them
but they will not deserve selection. And when they in their turn inherit the
powers of their fathers, the first thing they will neglect as guardians will be
us, the muses, since they will put too low a value on musical and literary
education, and the second thing they will neglect will be physical education,
the result will be a younger generation, which has even less regard for us. And
from their number, rulers will be appointed who completely lack a guardian's
ability, to discriminate between Hesiod's classes or the classes in your city:
gold, silver, bronze and iron. When iron is compounded with silver and bronze
with gold, then you will get unlikeness and discordant inequality. And when you
get those, wherever they occur, they always breed war and hostility. This is
seditions, noble line we have to say always, and wherever it arises.

What else do the muses have to say? When civil war breaks out, the classes or
natures are divided into two, the iron and bronze draw the state towards
commerce and the possession of land and housing of gold and silver, the other
pair by contrast, the gold and silver, lead the state towards virtue and
traditional order. In fighting and struggling against one another, they arrive
at a compromise, the land and housing is to be divided up and owned privately.
And they agree to enslave those who were previously watched over by them as free
men, friends and providers. They now hold them as surfs and slaves, while their
role is to watch them and conduct warfare. Yes, he said, I think that is the
origin of this sort of change. In which case, I said, would this regime be a
kind of halfway house between aristocracy and oligarchy? It certainly would.
Very well, will the points it has in common with the original regime be these,
respect for the rulers, the disqualification of the warrior element in the state
from agriculture, manual employment or any other kind of business, the
establishment of communal living quarters and the concentration on physical
education and training for war? Yes. Whereas feared of putting the wise into
positions of power, since the wise men it has are now complex not simple and
direct anymore, a leaning towards people who are spirited, more straightforward
and naturally cut out for war rather than peace, the value it places on military
deception and strategies, the way it spends its entire time at war, will most of
these characteristics be peculiar to itself? Yes. Now that they possess their
own treasuries and strong rooms where they can put their gold and silver and
keep it hidden, people like this will be avaricious, like the members of an
oligarchy, with a fierce and secret passion for gold and silver. And to protect
it all, they will have walls around their houses, real private nests where they
can spend a fortune on women, or anyone else they fancy? Very true, he said. The
value they put on money and their inability to acquire it openly will make them
mean with their own money, while their desires and the secret pleasures they
enjoy will make them extravagant with other peoples. They will run away from the
law like children running away from their father, since their education will not
have been a matter of conviction, but something imposed on them by force. This
in turn is the result of neglecting the true muse, the muse of argument and
philosophy, and setting a higher value on physical education than on education
in the arts. It's certainly a mixed regime you are describing, partly bad and
partly good? Yes, it is a mixture, I said, but it has one striking
characteristic which comes from the dominance of the spirited element, love of
victory and honour. Absolutely.

So much for this regime then, that's how it would have come into existence and
that's what it would be like. It's just an outline sketch of the regime without
filling in the details, but even a sketch will give us a good enough picture of
the completely just man and the completely unjust man. It's an impossibly long
task to describe every regime and every character without leaving anything out.
Quite right, he said. I imagine the next regime would be oligarchy, the regime
based on property qualifications where the rich rule, and a poor man is excluded
from power, do we have to explain how the change from timochy to oligarchy first
takes place? Yes. The regime we described is destroyed by the strong room full
of gold which each man possesses, they start by inventing extravagances for
themselves, and this leads them to bend the laws, since neither neither they nor
their wives are prepared to obey them. That's likely enough. The next step I
suppose, will have been for them to start eyeing one another and competing with
one another, and in this way they would reduce the whole population to their own
level. Very likely. After that presumably, they would become still further
involved in making money, and the higher the value they put on that, the lower
the value they would put on virtue. Isn't virtue always at odds with wealth in
this way, as if they were in the two scales of a balance, always trying to move
in opposite directions? Exactly, he said. And as wealth and the wealthy are more
valued in a city, so goodness and the good are valued less? Obviously. What is
valued at any particular time, becomes the common practice, what is not valued
is neglected? Yes. Eventually then, they stop being competitive and ambitious
and become mercenary and money- loving, they praise and admire the rich man and
admit him to positions of power, the poor man, they treat with contempt.
Absolutely. At that point, they pass a law defining the oligarchic regime. They
establish a wealth qualification, larger in an extreme oligarchy, smaller in a
more moderate oligarchy. And declare that anyone whose property does not not
reached the prescribed value, is debarred from the government, either they put
this into effect by force of arms, or else they've already established this kind
of regime earlier by intimidation, isn't that how it's done? It is. So that more
or less, is how it becomes established. Yes, he said, but what are the
characteristics of this regime, and what are the kind of faults we said it
possessed? Well, I said, the first fault is this very thing which defines its
nature, think what it would be like if you appointed ships captains in this way,
on the basis of a property qualification and refuse to command to a poor man,
even if he was better qualified. I think it would be a sorry voyage they'd find
themselves making, he said, and the same with any position of command over
anything? That's certainly my opinion. With the exception of a city, or
including a city? It is especially true of a city, he said, since the
responsibility a city brings, is the greatest and the most demanding. This would
be one great failing then, possessed by oligarchy. It looks like it. What about
its second failing, is that any less serious? What would it be, this second
failing? That a city of this kind is bound to be two cities, not one: a city of
the poor and a city of the rich, living in the same place but constantly is
scheming against one another. That is, god knows, as big a failing as the first.
You must ask yourself however, if this city isn't also the first to introduce an
evil, which is greater than either of these? What evil is that? There is nothing
to stop one person selling all his property, and a second person acquiring it.
Nothing to stop the first person still living in the city after selling his
property without being being one of the elements which make up the city. He is
neither businessman nor skilled worker, neither cavalryman nor infantry man,
just a poor man what they call, a man without means. Yes, he said. This city is
the first to introduce this evil. Certainly, in cities with oligarchic regimes,
this kind of thing is not prohibited in any way. If it were, you wouldn't get
one group of people who were very rich, and the rest living in complete poverty.
That's right. And here's another point to think about, at the point where
someone like this, was rich and spending all his money, was he even at that
time, any use to the city for the purposes we've been talking about, or was it
an illusion his being one of the rulers? Was he in truth, neither a ruler nor a
servant of the city, but merely a spendthrift? Yes, he said, it was an illusion
he was nothing more than a spendthrift. Do you want us to say then, that just as
a drone born in a cell, is a blight on the hive, so a man like this, is born as
a drone in a household, and as a blight on the city? By all means, Socrates.
Well then, Adeimantus, is it the case that god has made the winged variety of
drone all stingless, whereas of these two-legged drones, some are stingless, but
others have very nasty stings? Do those who finish up as beggars in their old
age, come from the stingless class, and all those who are labeled criminals,
come from the class with stings? Yes, that's true, he said. It's obvious then
that anywhere in a city you see beggars, there you can expect to find a secret
nest of thieves, pickpockets, robbers of temples and all these sorts of
malefactors. Yes, that's obvious. And don't you find beggars in cities with
oligarchic regimes? Yes, practically the whole population apart from the rulers.
Can we avoid the conclusion then that in these cities, there is a large number
of criminals with stings, and that the authorities systematically and forcibly,
keep them under control? No, we can't, he said. And can we not say that the
cause of people like this coming into existence there, is lack of education,
together with poor upbringing and constitutional arrangements? Yes, we can.
Well, that's roughly what the oligarchic city would be like, and those are the
evils it would contain, plus some others besides perhaps? Yes, that's about it.
Then that's another regime we can regard as dealt with, the one known as
oligarchic, whose rulers are chosen on the basis of a property qualification.