Book VII
---
If we are thinking about the effect of education or the lack of it on our
nature, there's another comparison we can make. Picture human beings living in
some sort of underground cave dwelling, with an entrance which is long as wide
as the cave and open to the light. Here they live from earliest childhood with
their legs and necks in chains so that they have to stay where they are
looking only ahead of them, prevented by the chains from turning their heads.
They have light from a distant fire which is burning behind them and above them.
Between the fire and the prisoners at a higher level than them, is a path along
which you must picture a low wall that has been built, like the screen which
hides people when they're giving a puppet show, and above which they make the
puppets appear. Yes, I can picture all that, he said. Picture also along the
length of the wall, people carrying all sorts of manufactured objects which
project above it, statues of people, animals made of stone and wood and all kinds
of materials. As you'd expect, some of the people carrying the objects are
speaking while others are silent. A strange picture and strange prisoners. No
more strange than us, I said. Do you think for a start, that prisoners of that
sort have ever seen anything more of themselves and of one another, than the
shadows cast by the fire, on the wall of the cave in front of them? How could
they, if they'd been prevented from moving their heads all their lives. What
about the objects which are being carried? Wouldn't they see only shadows of
these also? Yes, of course. So, if they were able to talk to one another, don't
you think they'd believe that the things they were giving names to, were the
things they could see passing? Yes they'd be bound to. What if the prison had
had an echo from the wall in front of them? Every time one of the people passing
by spoke, do you suppose they believe the source of the sound to be anything
other than the passing shadow? No, that's exactly what they would think. All in
all then what people in this situation would take for truth, would be nothing
more than the shadows of the manufactured objects. Necessarily. Suppose nature
brought this state of affairs to an end, I said, think what their release from
their chains and the cure for their ignorance would be like? When one of them
was untied and compelled suddenly to stand up turn his head, start walking and
look towards the light, he'd find all these things painful. Because of the
glare, he'd be unable to see things whose shadows he used to see before. What do
you suppose he'd say, if he was told that what he used to see before, was of no
importance, whereas now his eyesight was better since he was closer to what is,
and looking at things which more truly are. Suppose further that each of the
passing objects was pointed out to him, and that he was asked what it was and
compelled to answer. Don't you think he'd be confused? Wouldn't he believe the
things he saw before to be more true than what was being pointed out to him now?
Yes he would, much more true. If he was forced to look at the light itself,
wouldn't it hurt his eyes? Wouldn't he turn away and run back to the things he
could see? Wouldn't he think those things really were clearer than what was
being pointed out? Yes, he said. And if he was dragged out of thereby force, up
the steep and difficult path with no pause until he'd been dragged right into
the sunlight, wouldn't he find this dragging painful? Wouldn't he resent it? And
when he came into the light with his eyes filled with the glare, would he be
able to see a single one of the things people call real? No he wouldn't, not at
first. He'd need to acclimatise himself I imagine, if he were going to see
things up there. To start with, he'd find shadows, the easiest things to look
at. After that, reflections of people and other things in water, the things
themselves would come later and from those he would move onto the heavenly
bodies and the heavens themselves. He'd find it easier to look at the light of
the stars and the moon by night than look at the sun and the light of the sun by
day. Of course. The last thing he'd be able to look at presumably, would be the
sun, not its image in water or some location that is not its own, but the sun
itself. He'd be able to look at it by itself in its own place and see it as it
really was. Yes, he said, that would unquestionably be the last thing he'd be
able to look at. At that point, he would work out that it was the sun, which
caused the seasons and the years, which governed everything in the visible realm
and which was in one way or another responsible for everything they used to see.
That would obviously be the next stage. Now, suppose he were reminded of the
place where he lived originally of what passed for wisdom there and of his
former fellow prisoners, don't you think he would congratulate himself on the
change? Wouldn't he feel sorry for them? Indeed he would. Back in the cave, they
might have had rewards and praises and prizes for the person who was quickest at
identifying the passing shapes, who had the best memory for the ones which came
earlier or later or simultaneously, and Who as a result was best at predicting
what was going to come next, do you think he would feel any desire for these
prizes? Would he envy those who were respected and powerful there? Or would he
feel as Achilles does in Homer? Would he much prefer to labour as a common surf,
serving a man with nothing to his name, putting up with anything to avoid
holding those opinions and living that life? Yes, he said, if you ask me he'd be
prepared to put up with anything to avoid that way of life. There's another
question I'd like to ask you, I said. Suppose someone like that came back down
into the cave and took up his old seat, wouldn't he find coming straight in from
the sunlight, that his eyes were swamped by the darkness? I'm sure he would. And
suppose he had to go back to distinguishing the shadows in competition with
those who had never stopped being prisoners, before his eyes had grown
accustomed to the dark while he still couldn't see properly, and this period of
acclimatisation would be anything but short, wouldn't he be a laughing stock?
Wouldn't it be said of him that he'd come back from his journey to the upper
world with his eyesight destroyed, and that it wasn't worth even trying to go up
there? As for anyone who tried to set them free and take them up there, if they
could somehow get their hands on him and kill him, wouldn't they do just that?
They certainly would, he said. That is the picture then my dear Glaucon, and it
fits what we were talking about earlier in its entirety. The region revealed to
us by sight is the prison dwelling, and the light of the fire inside the
dwelling is the power of the sun. If you identify the upward path and the view
of things above, with the ascent of the soul to the realm of understanding, then
you will have caught my drift, my surmise, which is what you wanted to hear.
Whether it is really true, perhaps only god knows. My own view for what it's
worth is that in the realm of what can be known, the thing seen last and seen
with great difficulty, is the form or character of the good. But when it is
seen, the conclusion must be that it turns out to be the cause of all that is
right and good for everything. In the realm of sight, it produces light and
light sovereign, the sun. While in the realm of thought, it is itself,
sovereign, producing truth and reason unassisted. I further believe that anyone
who's going to act wisely either in private life or in public life, must have
had a sight of this form of the good. Well I for one agree with you, he said, as
far as I can follow at any rate. Can you agree with me then on one further
point, it's no wonder if those who have been to the upper world refuse to take
an interest in everyday affairs, if their souls are constantly eager to spend
their time in that upper region, it's what you'd expect presumably, if things
really are like the picture we've just drawn. Yes, it's what you'd expect. And
here's another question, do you think it's at all surprising if a person who
turns to everyday life after the contemplation of the divine, cuts a sorry
figure and makes a complete fool of himself, if before he can see properly or
can get acclimatised to the darkness around him, he is compelled to compete in
the law courts or anywhere else, about the shadows of justice or the statues,
which cast those shadows or to argue about the way they are understood by those
who have never seen justice itself? No, it's not in the least surprising, he
said. Anyone with any sense, I said, would remember that people's eyesight can
be impaired in two quite different ways, and for two quite different reasons.
There's the change from light to darkness, and the change from darkness to
light, he might then take it that the same is true of the soul, so that when he
saw a soul in difficulties, unable to see, he would not laugh mindlessly but
would ask whether it had come from some brighter life and could not cope with
the unfamiliar darkness, or whether it had come from greater ignorance into what
was brighter, and was now dazzled by the glare. One he would congratulate on
what it had seen and on its way of life, the other he would pity, or if he chose
to laugh at it, his laughter would be less absurd than laughter directed at the
soul which had come from the light above. Yes, what you say is entirely
reasonable. Well, I said, if it's true, there's one conclusion we can't avoid,
education is not what some people proclaim it to be. What they say roughly
speaking, is that they are able to put knowledge into souls, where none was
before, like putting sight into eyes which were blind. Yes, that is what they
say. Whereas our present account indicates that this capacity in every soul,
this instrument by means of which each person learns, is like an eye which can
only be turned away from the darkness, and towards the light by turning the
whole body. The entire soul has to turn with it, away from what is coming to be
until it is able to bear the sight of what is. And in particular, the brightest
part of it. This is the part we call the good, isn't it? Yes. It is up to us
then, as founders of the city, to compel the best natures to get as far as that
study which we said earlier was the most important, to make that ascent and view
the good. And when they have made it and seen all they need to see, we must not
allow them to do what they are allowed to do at the moment. What is that? Remain
there, I said, and refuse to come back down again to the prisoners we were
talking about or share in their hardships and rewards, be they trivial or
substantial. That seems very unfair, are we going to make them live a worse life
when it is in their power to live a better one? Now it's your turn to have
forgotten my friend, that the law does not exist for the exclusive benefit of
one class in the city, its aim is to engineer the benefit of the city as a
whole, using persuasion and compulsion to bring the citizens into harmony, and
making each class share with the other classes the contribution it is able to
bring to the community. The law is what puts people like this in the city, and
it does so not with the intention of allowing each of them to go his own way,
but so that it can make use of them for its own purposes, to bind the city
together. True, he said, I had forgotten that. In which case Glaucon, you should
bear in mind that we won't after all be doing an injustice to those who become
philosophers in our city, there will be justice in what we say to them, when we
compel them to look after and guard what belongs to other people. It is fair
enough we shall say to them, for philosophers in other cities not to take a
share of the work in those cities, their philosophy is a spontaneous growth,
which arises despite the institutions of the particular city they live in and
what has developed naturally indebted to nobody for its upbringing, is entitled
to be unenthusiastic about paying anyone for its upbringing. But with you, it's
different. We produced you as guides and rulers both to yourselves and to the
rest of the city, like leaders or kings in a hive of bees, you have been better
and more fully educated than the rest, and are better able to play your part in
both types of life, so you must go down, each of you in turn to join the others
in their dwelling place. You must get used to seeing in the dark, and when you
do get used to it you will see a thousand times better than the people there do.
You will be able to identify all the images there and know what they are images
of, since you have seen the truth of what is beautiful and just and good. In
this way, the government of the city for us and for you, will be a waking
reality rather than the kind of dream in which most cities exist nowadays,
governed by people fighting one another over shadows and quarrelling with one
another about ruling, as if ruling were some great good. The truth is I imagine,
that the city in which those who are to rule are most reluctant to do so, will
inevitably be the city which has the best and most stable government, whereas
the city with rulers of the opposite kind, will have a government of the
opposite kind. Exactly, he said. Will they disobey us then, do you think? These
people we have brought up, will they refuse to do their share of work in the
city each group in its turn, even though they can still spend most of their time
in each other's company in the clear air above? They can't possibly refuse, it's
a just demand and they are just people. But they will undoubtedly approach
ruling each one of them as something unavoidable, just the opposite of the
people who rule in every city at the the moment. That's right my friend, it's
like this, if you can find a better life than ruling for the people who are
going to be your rulers, then your well-governed city becomes a possibility, it
will be the only city ruled by those who are truly rich, not rich in money but
in a good and wise life. The rich is needed for good fortune. If you get
beggars, people who are starved of good things in their own lives, going into
public life because they believe that the good is something to be taken from
there as plunder, then your city is not a possibility. Ruling becomes something
to be fought over, and a war of this kind domestic and internal, destroys both
those involved in it and the rest of the city with them. Very true, he said. All
right then, can you think of any life apart from the life of true philosophy
which has a contempt for public office? Good heavens, no. But ruling must be
courted only by those who are not in love with her, otherwise they will have
rival suitors to contend with. Of course. And if you're going to compel people
to enter upon the guardianship of the city, who better than those who are wisest
in these matters? In what will give the city the best government, and who have
their own rewards and their own way of life, better than the political? There is
no one better, he said.
