Plato, The Republic

Book V
---
I was about to embark on a systematic account of the way I thought the various
categories developed out of one another, when Polemarchus who was sitting a
little bit away from Adeimantus, reached out a hand and took hold of his cloak
up at the shoulder, drawing Adeimantus towards him, he leaned forward and
started whispering to him. All we could hear it was: what shall we do? Shall we
let it go? No, Adeimantus replied out loud. What in particular, I asked, do you
not want to let go? You! What in particular that I have said? We think you're
taking the lazy way out, short-changing us out of a whole line of thought and an
important one in the argument, to save yourself the trouble of explaining it.
You think that when it comes to women and children, you can get away with a
casual remark to the effect that friends will hold things in common, as if no
one could be in any doubt about this. Wasn't what I said correct then,
Adeimantus? Yes, it was, he said. But like the rest of our correct statements,
it needs some explanation. What do you mean by common? There are lots of
possibilities and you're not going to get away without telling us which one you
mean. We've been sitting around here patiently, assuming you were bound to say
something about the production of children, what their practice will be in this
regard, and how they will bring the children up once they are born and this
whole business you've suggested of women and children being in common. We think
it's of great, indeed, crucial importance for our state whether this is done in
the right way or the wrong way. So, when you started to deal with another regime
before settling these questions in a satisfactory way, we made the decision you
heard as making, not to let you go until you have given a full description of
this topic like the other topics. Count me in as well, said Glaucon, as a joint
proposer of this motion. Take it as a unanimous decision Socrates, Thrasymachus
added. In that case, I said, I'd better go back and deal now with something I
should perhaps have dealt with earlier in its rightful place. Our intention, I
take it, was to make the men in our hypothetical city into some kind of
guardians of the herd? Yes. Shall we follow that up then by giving them a birth
and upbringing consistent with this role? Shall we see whether or not that suits
our purpose? What do you mean? I mean this. Do we think female watchdogs should
do their share of watching in the same way as male watchdogs? Should they do
their share of hunting and join in other activities, or do we think that bearing
and raising puppies makes them incapable of doing their share? Do we expect the
females to stay at home indoors while the males do the work and have the whole
responsibility for the flocks? We think they should join in everything, he said,
we treat the females as weaker though and the males as stronger. Well then, is
it possible to employ one animal for the same tasks as another without giving it
the same upbringing and training? No, it's not possible. So, if we're going to
employ women for the same tasks as men, we must give them the same teaching?
Yes. The education we gave men had a musical and poetic element and a physical
element? Yes. So women too should receive these two disciplines plus military
training, and they should be treated in the same way? It looks like it, he said,
from what you've been saying. Much of what we are saying now is pretty
unconventional, it may well seem absurd if our suggestions are really going to
be put into practice. Indeed, it may. What do you find the most absurd thing
about it? Isn't it obviously the idea of women taking exercise naked, along with
men in the wrestling schools? Not just young women but older ones as well, like
the old men you find in the gymnasiums. They're all wrinkled and by no means a
pretty sight, but they still retain an enthusiasm for taking exercise. Yes, he
replied, that would certainly look pretty absurd, at least the way things are at
present. Well, now that we've brought the subject up, we mustn't be afraid of
all the standard jokes we'd hear from humourists if we introduce changes of that
sort in physical exercise, in musical and poetic education and particularly, in
carrying arms and riding on horseback. You're right, he said. And since we have
brought it up, we must get onto the difficult business of legislation, with a
request to these comedians to be serious, we don't mind them not performing
their own proper function, we can remind them that it is not so very long since
the Greeks thought it immoral and absurd, as most foreigners still think it, for
men to be seen naked, when first the Cretans and then the Spartans started
exercising naked, all that became a legitimate target for the humourists of the
day, don't you agree? I do. I take it that once experience showed that you can
do all these activities better stripped than wearing clothes, then too the
perception of absurdity evaporated in the face of public recognition of what was
best, it became clear that only a fool regards as laughable anything other than
what is bad. Anyone who tries to be amusing by pointing at any spectacle other
than the spectacle of folly and wickedness must quite seriously have set himself
some standard of beauty other than that of the good. Exactly he said. Well then,
if we want a woman to become guardian material, we shall not have one education
for making men guardians and another for making women guardians, shall we?
Particularly, when they have the same natural attributes to start with? No, we
shall have the same education for both. Now here's another point I'd like your
opinion about. What is that? Whether you feel in your own mind that one man is
better and another man is worse, or do you think all men are the same? No, I
certainly don't. Well then, in the city we founded, which do you think we shall
find turn out the better men? The guardians who have received the education we
described or the shoemakers trained in the art of shoemaking. Well, that's a
fatuous question, he said. I see. What about the rest of the citizens? Aren't
the guardians better than all of them? Much better. What about the women? Won't
the women guardians be the best of the women? Again, he said, much the best. Is
there anything better for the city than for it to have its women and its men
alike become as good as possible? No, there isn't. And will this be brought
about by the availability of musical and physical education of the kind we
described? Of course. So, our arrangements are not only feasible but also in the
best interests of our city? Yes. They must strip then, the women among our
guardians, virtue will be their cloak, they must play their part both in war and
in being the guardians of the city in general, that and nothing else. And of
those tasks, women should be given lighter ones than men, because their sex is
weaker. Absolutely. Can we say then that in our provisions for the legal
position of women, we have survived the first wave of criticism? In laying down
that our male and female guardians should in all respects lead a common life, we
have not been completely overwhelmed. That's certainly no small wave you have
survived, he said.

You won't think so when you see the next one. Go on then, let me see it. I
believe that this law and the others which preceded it imply a further law. What
law? That all these women shall be wives in common for all these men, that none
of them shall live as individuals with any of the men, that children in turn
shall belong to all of them, that no parent shall know its own child, no child
its own parent. Yes, he said, when it comes to scepticism about the feasibility
or utility of this proposal, that is a much larger wave than the first. I don't
imagine there could be any disagreement about its utility, no one would deny
that if it is possible, having wives in common and children in common is a major
benefit. But on the question of its feasibility or otherwise, I suspect there
would be a lot of disagreement. There'd be plenty of disagreement, he replied,
on both counts. Be that as it may, for the moment I'll assume our proposals are
feasible. With your permission, I want to examine the way the rulers will
organize these things when they do happen, and show that putting them into
practice would be of the greatest possible benefit to the city and its
guardians. I want you to help me make a thorough examination of those questions
first, and leave the other questions until later if that's all right with you?
It's all right, he said, begin your inquiry. Very well, it will be your job just
as you selected the men, so now to select the women as well, as similar as
possible in nature, and allocate them to the men. Since houses and dining halls
will be communal, and no one will possess any private property of this kind, the
sexes will live in close proximity, and in this state of universal proximity
both in their physical education, and in the rest of their upbringing, their
natural instincts will inevitably I think, lead them into having sex with one
another, or don't you regard that as inevitable? Well, it's not a mathematical
inevitability but it's a sexual inevitability, and for the majority of people
that is probably a keen agent of persuasion and attraction. Much keener, I said.
Now for the next point, Glaucon. In the city of the blessed, haphazard sexual
intercourse is unholy, like haphazard behaviour of any kind. The rulers will not
allow it. No, because it is wrong. Clearly, the next step is for us to do
everything we can to make marriages as sacred as possible, and it'll be the most
useful marriages which are the sacred ones. Absolutely. What will make them the
most useful? Tell me something Glaucon, I've noticed that as well as hunting
dogs, you have a fair number of purebred birds in your house, isn't there one
thing you surely must have noticed, about their unions and production of
children? What sort of thing, he asked? For a start, though they are all pure-
bred, aren't some of them the best? Don't they prove themselves to be? Yes, they
do. Do you in that case breed from all of them alike, or are you careful to
breed as much as possible from the best? I breed from the best. What about age?
Do you breed from the youngest or the oldest? Or do you breed as far as possible
from those in their prime? From those in their prime. If the breeding is not
handled like this, do you think your stock of birds and dogs will greatly
deteriorate? Yes, I do. What about horses and other animals, I asked, do you
think they're in any way different? No, that would be absurd. Help, I exclaimed,
we're going to need some extremely expert rulers my dear friend, if the same
applies to the human race as well. Well, it certainly does apply, but why do
they have to be expert? I'll tell you. The probability is that our rulers will
need to employ a good deal of falsehood and deception for the benefit of those
they are ruling. On the principles we have agreed, the best men should have sex
with the best women as often as possible, whereas for the worst men and the
worst women, it should be the reversed. We should bring up the children of the
best but not the children of the worst, if the quality of our herd is to be as
high as we can make it. And all this has to happen with no one apart from the
actual rulers realizing it. If our herd of guardians is also to be as free as
possible from dissension. Quite right. In that case, we must legislate for some
festivals, at which we shall bring together the brides and their grooms. We must
have sacrifices and our poets must compose hymns, appropriate to the unions
which are taking place, we must have lotteries and pretty ingenious ones, so
that every time there is a marriage, the inferior type we want to exclude will
blame chance, rather than the rulers. They'll have to be extremely ingenious,
these lotteries of yours. Presumably those among the young men who are
outstanding in war or any other sphere are to be given various prizes and
rewards, and in particular, more generous permission to sleep with the women, so
that as many of the children as possible can plausibly be fathered by young men
of this sort. That's right. As for the children who will be born from time to
time, they will be taken away by officials responsible for these things, these
officials may be men or women or men and women, since offices I take it are open
to women and men alike? Yes. The children of good parents will be taken, I
think, and transferred to the nursing pen, where there will be special nurses
living separately in a special part of of the city. The children of inferior
parents on the other hand, or any deformed specimen born to the other group,
will be removed from sight into some secret and hidden place. As is right. Yes,
he said, at any rate if the breed of guardians is going to remain pure. Now, I
said, let's continue in a systematic way with the task we set ourselves, we said
children should be born to those in their prime? True. Well, do you agree that a
reasonable span for a woman's prime is 20 years and for a man's 30? Which 20 and
which 30, he asked? For a woman, it means starting at 20 and going on bearing
children for the city until 40. For a man when his days as a sprinter are behind
him, then he should father children for the city from that age until 55. Yes, he
agreed, for both of them, that is the prime of life both physically and
mentally. If someone older or younger than this takes part in producing children
for the state, we shall call it an offence against the gods and against justice,
and the same law applies if a man who is still entitled to father children, gets
access to a woman of the appropriate age without a ruler promoting the union, we
shall say he is presenting the city with an illegitimate, unauthorised and
unholy child. And we shall be absolutely right, he said. Of course, when women
and men pass the age for producing children, we shall declare them free
presumably, to have sex with anyone they like, apart from a daughter or a
mother, or their daughter's daughters, or their mother's mothers. For a woman,
anyone other than a son or father, or their son's sons or father's fathers, and
all this only when we have first impressed upon them how careful they must be,
if there is a pregnancy, then ideally, the embryo should never see the light of
day. If one does force its way into existence, the parents must deal with it on
the understanding that they cannot bring up a child of this sort. That all seems
quite reasonable, he said. But this business of fathers and daughters and the
relationships you were talking about just now, how will they tell their own from
anyone else's? They won't. When a man takes part in a marriage, he will regard
as his children all those born in the 10th month from the day of the festival.
He will call the male children his sons, and the female children his daughters.
They will call him father, similarly he will call the children's offspring his
grandchildren, and they in turn will call his generation grandfathers and
grandmothers. Those born during the period when their mothers and fathers were
producing children, they will call their sisters and brothers. In this way, they
can avoid one another, as we were suggesting just now. However, the law will
allow unions between brothers and sisters, if that is how the lot falls out, and
if the Pythian priestess, gives her consent as well. Quite right. There you are
Glaucon, that's what it is for women and children to be in common among the
guardians of your city, that's what it is like.

The next thing we have to do is establish from what has been said that it is
consistent with the rest of the constitution, and that it is by far the best
arrangement, or should we go about things in some other way? No no, that's the
best way undoubtedly. If we want to settle this, isn't a good starting point to
ask ourselves, what is the greatest good we can think of in the organization of
our city? The thing the lawgiver should be aiming at as he frames his laws, and
what is the greatest evil, then we can ask, do the proposals we have just
described, match the features of this good, do they fail to match, the features
of this evil. Yes, that's the best possible starting point, he said. Well then,
can we think of any greater evil for a city than what tears it apart and turns
it into many cities instead of one? Or any greater good than what unites it and
makes it one? No, we can't. Is it community of pleasure and pain which unites it
when as far as possible all the citizens are equally affected by joy or grief
over any particular gain or loss? It certainly is. And is individual variation
in these feelings divisive, things happen to the city or to its inhabitants
which make some people distraught and others delighted? Of course, it's
divisive. Is this because words like mine and not mine, are not applied by
everyone in the city to the same things? The same with somebody else's? It
certainly is. Does that mean the best regulated city is the one in which the
greatest number of people use this phrase mine or not mine in the same way,
about the same thing. Much the best. When anything at all good or bad happens to
one of its citizens, a city of this kind will be most inclined to say that what
is affected is a part of itself, the whole city will rejoice together, or grieve
together. Yes, it's bound to, a city with good laws, that is. This is the moment
for us to return to our city I said, and look for the characteristics our
argument has led us to agree on. We want to know if this city possesses them to
an outstanding degree or if some other city does. Yes, we do need to go back and
do that. Very well. Presumably, there are rulers and common people, aren't
there, in other cities as well as in our city? There are. Do they all call one
another citizens? Of course. But in other cities, what else does the common
people call the rulers, apart from calling them citizens? In most cities, they
call them their masters, in democratic cities, they just call them rulers. What
about the common people in our city, what do they say their rulers are, apart
from being citizens? Saviours and defenders, he said. And what do the rulers
call the common people? Pay masters and providers. What do the rulers in other
cities call their common people? Slaves. And what do the rulers call each other?
Fellow rulers. What do ours call each other? Fellow guardians. Can you answer
this then, would any of the rulers in the other cities find it possible to
address one of his fellow rulers as a relative, and another as unrelated? Yes,
plenty of them would find that possible. Doesn't such a person think and speak
of his relative as his and one who is unrelated as not his? Yes. What about your
guardians? Could any of them think of one of his fellow guardians or address him
as if he were unrelated? No, he said, every time he meets any of them, he will
assume he's meeting his brother or sister or father or mother or son or daughter
or the child or parent of one of these. In that case, there will be greater
agreement in this city than in any other, about the terms we were referring to a
moment ago. They will say of the success or failure of any individual, this
success is mine or this failure is mine. Very true, he said. And did we say that
feeling pleasures and pains in common followed from this way of thinking and
speaking? We did and we were right. Then will our citizens more than any others
hold one and the same thing which they will call mine in common, and because
they feel the same about it, will they feel the greatest community of pain and
pleasure? Very much the greatest. And the reason for this, over and above the
general organization of the city, is the business of women and children being in
common among our guardians. Yes, that's the main reason, he said, far more
important than anything else. And when it comes to making war, isn't it obvious
how they will go about it? How? They will go on campaign together, bringing the
most robust of the children with them on active service so that like the
children of people in other skilled occupations, they can observe the occupation
they will have to follow when they grow up. Besides observing, they should act
as assistants and servants in everything to do with war, and be some help to
their fathers and mothers. Haven't you noticed how people learn a skill? The
children of potters for example, spent a long time as assistants, watching
before they're allowed anywhere near a pot. A very long time. And are potters
going to be more careful than our guardians when it comes to educating their own
children, giving them the necessary experience and opportunity to observe? No
that would be ludicrous, he said. What is more, any living creature will fight
better in the presence of its own young. That's true but, if they are defeated
and these things do happen in time of war, there's a very real danger Socrates,
that along with the guardians themselves, the children will be lost as well and
that this will make recovery impossible for the rest of the city. True, I said,
but what is your view on that? Do you think for instance that the aim should be
to avoid all possible risk? No. Well then, if they are going to take risks,
shouldn't it be in situations where success will make them better people?
Obviously. Do you think that for men who are going to be warlike, it makes very
little difference and is therefore not worth the risk whether or not they can
observe the art of war as children. No, it does make a difference in the way you
suggest. What we want to bring about then, is a way of making the children
observers of war, while at the same time thinking of some clever means of
ensuring their safety. That would be ideal, wouldn't it? Yes. Well then, I said,
for one thing, their fathers will not be without experience, they will be as
expert as human beings can be at judging which campaigns are dangerous and which
are not. Fair enough. So they will take them on some campaigns but think twice
about others. Yes, that'll be the right approach. And to command them, their
fathers will presumably not give them those who are least able, but those well
qualified by age and experience to be guides and tutors. Yes, those will be the
right people. Will this be enough, I asked, after all, events are unpredictable
as all sorts of people are constantly finding out? They certainly are. So, to
meet unpredictable situations, we must give them wings my friend, from their
earliest childhood, then they can take to flight if they have to. What do you
mean? We must put them on horseback at the youngest possible age, once we have
taught them to ride, we can take them as observers, mounted on horses which are
not spirited and warlike, but the swiftest and most obedient we can find. In
this way they can get an excellent view of what will be their occupation, and
still make their escape safely, if the need arises by following guides who are
older than they are. I think that's a good suggestion, he said. What about the
actual fighting, I asked, let's start with their behaviour towards each other.
Anyone who out of cowardice leaves his place in the line, throws away his
weapons or does anything of that sort, should be reduced to the rank of skilled
worker or farmer, shouldn't he? He certainly should. Anyone who falls alive into
the hands of the enemy can be handed over as a gift to those who capture him,
they can do what they like with their catch. By all means. As for someone who
wins a prize for valour and distinguishes himself, don't you think that in the
first place, he should be crowned there in the field, by the adolescents and
children every one of them in turn, who are on campaign with him? I do. How
about being shaken by the hand? Yes, that too. You won't agree with my next
suggestion, I don't suppose. What is it? That he should kiss and be kissed by
each of them, that above all and I propose an amendment to this law, for the
duration of the campaign, no one he wants to kiss, shall be allowed to refuse.
That should make anyone who is in fact in love with someone else whether that
someone is male or female, all the more determined to win a prize. Excellent, I
said. After all, it has already been decided that the good man is to get more
marriages than other people, and that the good should be selected more
frequently than the rest, so that as many children as possible may be born to
parents of this kind. Yes, we did decide that. Very well. Then we come to those
killed on active service, if anyone dies after covering himself with glory,
shall we not say first of all, that he is a member of the golden class? We
certainly shall. And shall we inquired of Apollo how we ought to bury these
superhuman, these divine people and what mark of distinction we should give
them, and shall we then bury them in the way he recommends? We certainly shall.
For the rest of the time, shall we look after their graves as those of super-
humans and bow down before them? Shall we follow this same observance on the
death of anyone who is judged to have been outstandingly good in his life,
whether he dies from old age or any other cause? Yes, he said, that will be the
right thing to do.

Now what about the enemy? How will our soldiers treat them? What do you mean?
Take enslavement for a start, do you think it is right for Greeks to enslave
Greek cities? Or should they rather do everything they can to stop any other
city doing so? Should they encourage other cities always to spare the Greek
race, and so protect themselves against enslavement by the barbarians? Yes.
Sparing them is far and away the best policy. Is the best thing then, for them
to avoid owning Greek slaves themselves, and also to advise other Greeks not to
own them? It certainly is, he said. That way they're likely to turn their
attention more towards the barbarians, and leave one another alone. How about
plundering the dead I asked, after a victory, apart from their weapons that is?
Is that the right thing to do? Doesn't it give cowards an excuse not to go after
those who are offering resistance, as if they were performing some useful tasks
in grubbing around the body on their hands and knees, haven't armies often been
lost as a result of this kind of looting? Yes, very often. Besides, doesn't
plundering corpses strike you as demeaning and mercenary? Isn't it petty and
womanish to go on regarding the body of the dead person as hostile, once the
enemy has flown, leaving behind the instrument he was fighting with? Can you see
any difference at all between a person behaving like this, and dogs which get
angry with the stones they are hit by, but show no interest in the person
throwing them? No, he said, no difference at all. Should we then put a stop to
plundering corpses and refusing to allow an enemy to take up the dead for
burial? We most certainly should. They won't, I imagine, take their weapons to
their temples to present as offerings, particularly not the weapons of Greeks if
they are at all interested in maintaining good relations with the rest of
Greece. They are more likely to be afraid there may be some pollution in
bringing offerings of this kind to a temple from their fellow Greeks, unless of
course, god tells them something different. Quite right. And because they are
Greeks, they will not lay waste to Greece or burn houses or accept that all the
inhabitants of a city, men, women and children alike, are their enemies. They
will regard their enemies at any particular time as few, the ones responsible
for the dispute. For all these reasons, they will refuse to lay waste the land
or destroy the houses of people whom they mostly regard as their friends, they
will pursue their dispute, only up to the point where those responsible are
compelled by those who are not responsible and who are suffering, as a result,
to make amends. For my part, he said, I agree that this is how our citizens
should treat their enemies. As for the barbarians, they should treat them in the
way Greeks at the moment treat one another. Should we then lay down another law
for our guardians, forbidding them to devastate land or burn houses? Yes, we
should, and let us by all means lay it down that we're satisfied both with these
arrangements and with our earlier ones. The fact is Socrates, if you're allowed
to go and talking about this kind of thing, I don't think you'll ever come back
to the question you originally postponed in order to go into all these details.
You needn't go on discussing the arrangements, instead, can we concentrate on
giving ourselves a convincing answer to the questions. Are they possible and how
are they possible? We can forget about the rest. That's a very direct assault I
said, on my way of explaining things. You don't have a great deal of sympathy
with my misgivings. What you perhaps don't realize, after I have narrowly
escaped the first two waves of criticism, is that you are now exposing me to a
third, the largest and most threatening of the three, but you will have a lot of
sympathy when you see it and hear it. You will see why I hesitated, why I was
afraid to put forward such an unlikely sounding answer for examination. The more
excuses you make, the less chance there is that we shall let you off telling us
how these political arrangements are possible, stop playing for time and tell
us!
