Book IV
---
I take it, our city if it has been correctly founded is wholly good? It can't
help being. Clearly then it is wise, courageous, self-disciplined and just?
Clearly. Then as we find each of these elements in it, those we have not yet
found will constitute the remainder. Of course. With any four things if we were
looking for one of them in someplace or other, and it was the first thing we
caught sight of that would be enough for us, but if we identified the other
three first, then the one we were looking for would ipso facto, have been
identified as well since clearly it could then only be whatever was left. You're
right he said. It's the same for us now, since there actually are four elements,
should we conduct our search in the same way? Yes obviously. Well I think the
first one to catch the eye is wisdom and it seems to have an unusual feature.
What is that? It is truly wise I think this city we have described. It has good
judgment, doesn't it? Yes. Now this thing, judgment is clearly knowledge of some
sort, good decisions I take it are the result of knowledge not ignorance?
Obviously. But our city contains many types of knowledge of very different
kinds? Of course it does. Is it the knowledge possessed by carpenters which
entitle us to call our city wise and say it possesses good judgment? Certainly
not he said, that merely entitles us to call it good at carpentry. So a city is
not to be called wise because of its knowledge and judgment in making the best
possible wooden furniture? Absolutely not. How about its knowledge of making
things out of bronze or any other knowledge of that kind? No nothing like that
he said. Nor the knowledge of how to grow crops from the soil since that's
called farming? So I believe. Is there then I asked, among any of the citizens
of this city we have just founded, any branch of knowledge which makes decisions
about the city asa whole deciding on the best policy towards its own members and
towards other states, and not about one particular element in the city. There
most certainly is. What is this knowledge and in which group is it to be found?
It is the knowledge possessed by the guardians he said, and it is to be found in
the rulers whom we have just been calling the perfect guardians. And what is the
label you give your city on the strength of this knowledge? I call it sound in
judgment and truly wise. So which do you think our city will have more of? Metal
workers or these true guardians? Metal workers he said, far more. Of all the
groups which have a branch of knowledge of their own and which are identified as
a group, wouldn't the guardians be the smallest? Easily the smallest. In which
case the wisdom of a city founded on natural principles depends entirely on its
smallest group and element, the leading and ruling element and the knowledge
that element possesses. The class which can be expected to share in this branch
of knowledge which of all branches of knowledge is the only one we can call
wisdom is by its nature apparently the smallest class. That's very true he said.
Well that's one of the four things we were looking for and we've not only found
it I'm not quite sure how, but also found whereabouts in the city it is located.
Nothing much wrong with the way it was found as far as I'm concerned he said.
Courage next, it is not hard to see both the thing itself and the part of the
city in which it is located, the part which gives the city the name courageous.
Explain. No one classifying a city as cowardly or brave would look at any other
part of it than the part which makes war in the city's defence and serves in its
army. Yes that's the only part anyone would look at he said. I think the reason
for that I said, is that the cowardice or bravery of the rest of the population
would not be enough to make the city itself cowardly or brave. No it wouldn't.

That leaves two things for us to identify in our city I said, one is self-
discipline, the other is the object of our entire investigation, justice. Yes.
Well, is there some way we can find justice without having to bother about self-
discipline? I don't know he said. I wouldn't want it to make its appearance too
soon if that means giving up the search for self-discipline, if I have any say
in the matter, please examine self-discipline first. Very well. My first
impression is that it is more like a harmony or musical mode than the other two.
In what way? Self-discipline, I take it, is a kind of order. They say it as a
mastery of pleasures and desires, and a person is described as being in some way
or other master of himself. And there are other clues of the same sort in the
way it is talked about, aren't there? Indeed there are, he said. But isn't the
phrase master of himself an absurdity? The master of himself must surely also be
slave to himself, and the slave to himself must be master of himself, it's the
same person being talked about all the time. Of course. What this way of
speaking seems to me to indicate is that in the soul of a single person there is
a better part and a worse part. When the naturally better part is in control of
the worse, this is what is meant by master of himself, it is a term of approval.
But when as a result of bad upbringing or bad company, the better element is too
small and is overwhelmed by the volume of the worse element, this is a matter
for reproach, they call a person in this condition a slave to himself and
undisciplined. Yes I think that is what it indicates he said. Now if you take a
look at this new city of ours, you will find one of these situations prevailing.
You will admit that it can quite legitimately be called mistress of itself if
something in which the better rules the worse can be called self-disciplined and
master of itself. Yes when I take a look at our city he said, you are right. But
you also find the whole range and variety of desires, pleasures and pains,
particularly in children, women, slaves and among so-called free men in the
majority of ordinary people. You certainly do. Whereas simple and moderate
desires which are guided by rational calculation using intelligence and correct
belief are things you come across only among a few people, those with the best
natural endowment and the best education. True he said. Well do you seethe same
qualities in your city? Are the desires of the ordinary majority controlled by
the desires and wisdom of the discerning minority? Yes they are. So if any city
can be called the mistress of its pleasures and desires and mistress of itself,
this one can. It certainly can he said. In which case, can't we also call it
self-disciplined in all these respects? Very much so. What is more, if agreement
is to be found among rulers and rules in any city about which of them is to
rule, it is to be found in this one, don't you think? I couldn't agree more.
Well then when they agree in this way, in which of the two groups of citizens
will you say the self-discipline is located, in the rulers or in the ruled? In
both I suppose. See what a plausible prediction we made just now I said, when we
compared self-discipline to a harmony of some sort. Explain. It is not the same
as courage and wisdom, each of those was located in a particular part, yet one
of them made the whole city wise and the other made it brave. Self-discipline
does not operate in the same way, it extends literally throughout the entire
city over the whole scale, causing those who are weakest in intelligence if you
like, or in strength or again in numbers, wealth or anything like that, together
with those who are strongest and those in between to sing in unison. So we would
be quite justified in saying that self-discipline is this agreement about which
of them should rule a natural harmony of worse and better, both in the city and
in each individual. I quite agree he said. Very well, three of the qualities
have been identified in our city, or such is our impression at any rate. What
can the remaining quality be which allows a city to share in excellence? Because
clearly this is going to be justice. Clearly. Now Glaucon, this is the moment
for us to position ourselves, like huntsmen in a ring round the thicket. We must
concentrate and make sure justice does not escape, we don't want it to vanish
and disappear from view. It's obviously here somewhere, so keep your your eyes
open and try your hardest to see where it is. If you see it first, give me a
shout. Some hope he said. No I'm afraid the only help I'm going to be to you, is
if you want a follower someone who can see things when they're pointed out to
him. Say a prayer then and follow me. I will, just you lead the way he said. The
place is impenetrable I said, and full of shadows and it's certainly dark. Not
an easy place to dislodge our quarry from, still we must go on. Yes we must. And
then I caught sight of it. Ha ha, over here Glaucon, I cried. This looks like
the trail I think our quarry is not going to escape us after all. That's good
news he said. We've been complete idiots. In what way? We're fine ones, it's
been lying here under our noses all this time, the principle we laid down right
at the start when we first founded our city, as something we must stick to
throughout. This I think or some form of it, is justice. The principle we laid
down and often repeated if you remember was that each individual should follow
out of the occupations of available in the city, the one for which his natural
character best fitted him. Yes we did say that. And we have often heard others
say and have often said ourselves that doing one's own job and not trying to do
other people's jobs for them is justice. Yes we have said that. Well it looks my
friend as if in some way or other, justice is this business of everyone
performing his own task. Do you know what makes me think that? No tell me. I
think the remaining element in the city, besides the virtues we've been looking
at, self-discipline, courage and wisdom, is the thing which gave all the others
the power to come into being. And the thing whose continued presence keeps them
safe once they have come into being. We said earlier that justice would be the
one left over if we could only find the other three. Yes it would have to be he
said. Now if we had to decide I said, which of these elements would do most to
make our city good by its inclusion, that would be a difficult decision. Is it
the agreement of the rulers and the ruled or the preservation in the ranks of
the warriors, of an opinion approved by law, about which things are to be feared
and which are not, or the wisdom and protectiveness we find in the rulers, or
does the largest contribution to making the city good come from the presence in
child and woman, slave and free man, in skilled craftsman, ruler and ruled, of
the principle that each single individual is to perform his own task without
troubling himself about the tasks of others. Yes that would be a difficult
decision he said. Bound to be. So as a means of producing an excellent city, the
ability of everyone to perform his own function is apparently a strong
competitor with the city's wisdom, self-discipline and courage. Very much so.
Now see if you agree with me about the next step. If a carpenter tried to do the
job of a shoemaker, or a shoemaker the job of a carpenter, either because they
exchange tools and positions in society, or because one person tried to do both
jobs. Do you think in general that changes of this sort would do much harm to
the city. No not really he said. But I imagine it's different when someone who
is naturally a skilled worker or businessman of some kind is puffed up by
wealth, popularity, strength or something like that and tries to enter the
warrior class, or when one of the warriors tries to enter the decision-making
and guardian class without being up to it. If these people exchange tools and
positions in society or if one person tries to do all these jobs at the same
time, then I think he will agree with me that this change and interference on
their part is destructive to the city? Yes it certainly is. It is the
interference of our three classes with one another then and interchange between
them which does the greatest harm to the city, and can rightly be called the
worst crime against it. Absolutely. Isn't injustice the name for the greatest
crime against one's own city? Of course. That then is what injustice is.
Conversely, its opposite, the ability of the commercial, auxiliary and guardian
classes to mind their own business with each of them performing its own function
in the the city, this will be justice and will make the city just. Yes I think
that's exactly how it is he said. And is a just man just Glaucon, in the same
way a city was just? He is. We haven't at any point forgotten I hope, that the
city was just when each of the three elements in it was performing its own
function? No I don't think we've forgotten that he said. In that case we must
also remember that each one of us will be just and perform his own proper task
when each of the elements within him is performing its proper task. Yes we must
certainly remember that. Isn't it appropriate for the rational element to rule
because it is wise and takes thought for the entire soul, and appropriate for
the spirited element to be subordinate, the ally of the rational element? Yes.
Won't a combination as we said, of musical and physical education make these two
elements concordant? They will bring the rational part to a higher pitch with
their diet of improving stories and studies, while at the same time toning down
the spirited part by gentle encouragement, calming it by means of harmony and
rhythm. They certainly will he said. When these two elements are brought up on a
diet of this kind, when they truly receive the teaching and education
appropriate to them, then the two of them will exercise control over the
desiring element, which in any individual is the largest element in the soul and
left to itself the most insatiable where material goods are concerned. They will
keep a close eye on it to make sure the satisfaction of the body's so-called
pleasures, doesn't encourage it to grow great and strong, stop performing its
own function and throw the life of all of them into confusion by its attempt to
enslave and rule over elements which it is not naturally equipped to rule over.
They will indeed he said, a very close eye. Aren't these two elements also the
best defenders for body and soul in their entirety against external enemies? One
makes the decisions, the other does the fighting, under the leadership of the
ruling element using its courage to put those decisions into effect. True. The
title brave I think, is one we give to any individual because of this part of
him, when the spirited element in him, though surrounded by pleasures and pains,
keeps intact the instructions given to it by reason, about what is to be feared
and what is not to be feared. Rightly so he said. And the title wise because of
that small part which acted as an internal ruler and gave those instructions,
having within it a corresponding knowledge of what was good both for each part
and for the whole community of the three of them together. Exactly. What about
self-discipline? Isn't that the result of the friendship and harmony of these
three, the ruling element and the two elements which are ruled agree that what
is rational should Rule and do not rebel against it? Yes that's exactly what
self-discipline is he said, both for a city and for an individual. And a person
will be just finally by virtue of the principle we have several times stated, it
determines both the fact and the manner of his justice. Yes inevitably. In that
case I said, do we find justice looking at all blurred around the edges? Does it
seem any different to us from what it was when it showed up in the city? Not to
me, it doesn't. In which case, do you still want justice to be anything more
than this power which can produce both men and cities of this caliber? No that's
more than enough for me he said. In that case, we have seen the final
realisation of our dream, our suspicion that our very first attempt at founding
our city might possibly, with a bit of divine guidance, have hit upon both the
origin and some sort of model of justice. Yes we certainly have seen its
realisation. So this principle Glaucon, that if you are a shoemaker by nature,
you should confine yourself to making shoes, if you are a carpenter you should
confine yourself to carpentry and so on, really was a kind of image of justice,
which is why it was so useful to us. Apparently so. But the truth is that
although justice apparently was something of this kind, it was not concerned
with the external performance of a man's own function, but with the internal
performance of it, with his true self and his own true function forbidding each
of the elements within him to perform tasks other than its own. And not allowing
the classes of thing within his soul to interfere with one another. He has quite
literally, to put his own house in order, being himself his own ruler, mentor
and friend and tuning the three elements, just like three fixed points in a
musical scale, top, bottom and intermediate. And if there turn out to be any
intervening elements, he must combine them all and emerge as a perfect unity of
diverse elements, self-disciplined and in harmony with himself. Only then does
he act, whether it is a question of making money or taking care of his body or
some political action or contractual agreements with private individuals. In all
these situations, he believes and declares that a just and good action is one
which preserves or brings about this state of mind, wisdom, being the knowledge
which directs the action. An unjust action by contrast, is any action which
tends to destroy this state of mind, ignorance in its turn, being the opinion
which directs the unjust action. You're absolutely right Socrates. Well then I
said, if we were to say we had found the just man and the just city and what
justice really was in them, we couldn't be said to be totally wide of the mark
in my view, the only question now remaining for us to answer it seems is which
is more profitable, just actions, good behaviour and being just whether the just
person is known to be just or not, or unjust actions and being unjust even if
the unjust person gets away with it and never reforms as a result of punishment.
Now that justice and injustice have turned out to be the kinds of things we've
described, that seems an absurd question if you want my opinion Socrates. When
the body's natural constitution is ruined, life seems not worth living even with
every variety of food and drink and all manner of wealth and power, is someone's
life going to be worth living when the natural constitution of the very thing by
which he lives is upset and ruined? Even assuming he can then do anything he
likes, apart from what will release him from evil and injustice, and win him
justice and virtue. You're right I said, it's an absurd question. Still, now
that we've got to the point of being able to see as clearly as possible, that
this is how things are, this isn't the moment to take a rest. No he said, the
last thing we should do is to show any hesitation. This way then, if you want to
see what I believe to be the forms taken by vice, the ones worth looking at
anyway. I'm right behind you he said, speak on! Well, now that we've got this
far in our discussion I said, it looks from my vantage point, as if there is a
single form of virtue and any number of forms of vice, of which four are worth
mentioning. Please explain he said. If you think how many types of political
regime there are with their own specific form I said, that's probably how many
types of soul there are. And how many is that? Five types of political regime I
said, and five types of soul. Tell me which they are he said. All right. I would
say that one type of regime is this one we have just described, though there are
two names it might be given. It might be called monarchy if one exceptional
individual emerges among the rulers or aristocracy if several emerge. True. This
one then I class as a single form I said, it makes no difference whether it is
several who emerge or an individual. Given the upbringing and education we have
described, they would not disturb any of the important law laws of the city. No
that wouldn't be sensible he said.